Other All Thumbs Guides Painting, Wallpapering, and Stenciling Repairing Major Home Appliances Illustrations by Patie Kay Blue Ridge Summit, PA TAB Books is a di ision of McGraw-Hill, Inc. Printed in the United States of America. All rights reser 'ed. The pubhsher takes no responsibilitv for the use of any of the materials or methods described in this book, nor for the products thereof. Library of Congress Cataloging- Publication Data VCRs by Gene B. Williams. ideu tapf leL&cders and recording. ^- __i Viueu lapf ieL&cQ( Editorial Team: Roland S. Phelps, Acquisitions Editor Melanie D. Brewer, Book Editor Design Team: aclvn J. Boone, Designer Brian Allison, Associate Designer Production Team: Katherine G. Brown, Director of Production Wanda S. Ditch, Layout Susan E. Hansford, Typesetter Kelly S. Christman, Proofreader Joan Wieland, Proofreader Cover Design: Lori E. Schlosser Cover Illustration: Denny Bond, East Petersburg, Pa. Cartoon Caricature: Michael Malle, Pittsburgh, Pa. The All Thumbs Guarantee TAB Books McGraw-Hill guarantees that you will be able to follow every step of each project in this book, from beginning to end, or you will receive your money back. If you are unable to follow the All Thumbs steps, return this book, your store receipt, and a brief Blue Ridge Summit, PA 17214- This and every All Thumbs book has a special lay-flat binding. To take full advantage of this binding, open the book to any page and run your finger along the spine, pressing down as you do so; the book will stay open at the page you' e selected. The lay-flat binding is designed to withstand constant use. Unlike regular book bindings, the spine will not weaken or crack when you press down on the spine to eep the book open. To Tommy Kay who did more than he nows. A number of people helped in getting this series started and this book put together. Most of all I would like to thank Patie Kay, my artist, "partner," and close friend. She not only created all of the art used in this book but spent countless hours reading and critiquing the material. Without her this book wouldn't be nearly as good, and certainly wouldn't haye been as much fun. Melanie Brewer of TAB Books ser 'ed as the book editor. Her dedication to the ob and her patience as we struggled to get the format ust right did much toward making the final book possible. Roland Phelps, also of TAB, oyersaw the project and helped to smooth the many bumps and turns that had to be made while getting And of course there is Cindy, my wife, and Danny, my son, who patiently tolerated all the long and odd hours. Controls & Connectors Basic Troubleshooting Cleaning Your Machine Idlers, Belts & Other Parts collection of books about yourself home repair and impro 'ement, the All Thumbs series was created not for the skilled ack- all-trades, but for the average homeowTier If your familiarity wath the arious systems in the home is minimal, or your budget doesn't eep pace wath today's climbing costs, this series is tailor More than two-thirds of all homes in America have at least one VCR, and the number continues to grow. Many won't believe that you can take care of at least of any malfunctions and nearly 1009c of the maintenance yourself. Follow the maintenance steps provided in this book and the number of malfunctions will be greatly reduced. You'll face fewer repairs and less serious repairs (many of which you will be able to handle yourself). Also, your VCR will last longer The All Thumbs series saves you time and money by showing you how to make most common repairs yourself. The guides cover topics such as home wiring; plumbing; painting, stenciling, and wallpapering; repairing major appliances; and home energy savings, to name a few. Copiously illustrated, each book details the procedures in an easy- follow, step- step format, making many repairs and home improvements well within the ability of nearly any Designed for the novice yourselfer, this guide walks you through the troubleshooting necessary to properly maintain your VCR and the cleaning process that often solves the majority of VCR malfunctions. When it comes time for repair, the simple step- step instructions in this book will make }'ou successful the ery first time you try. Chapter 1 explains the importance of safety. All the tools you'll need and how to use them are described in chapter 2. Chapter 3 explains the controls common to most VCRs and chapter 4 walks you through the basics of how a VCR works. With this essential but simple background, you're ready to open the VCR. This is easier than you might suspect. Chapter 5 tells you exactly how to do it and chapter 6 explains how to clean your VCR to eep it in top condition. Chapter 7 details some of the simple checks and repairs you can make, and the tapes themselves are covered in chapter 8. Make the connections that will turn individual units into the ultimate system with the guidance of chapter 9. The purpose of this book is to help you understand that you have fewer limitations than you suspected. You'll be surprised at ust how much you can do. Follow the directions m this book and your VCR will work better and last longer. When you open the case of your VCR and take some troubleshooting steps, be sure to write down what you do. Even if you are unable to fix the problem, you can save yourself money by being able to help the technician spot the problem faster. Also with these notes, you are less likely to pay for unnecessary work done to your VCR. Running across dishonest technicians is relatively rare, but it can happen. By being aware, and having your own preliminary notes, you can eliminate this almost completely. If your VCR is still under warranty, s generally best to let the authorized service center take care of any problems. The warranty generally covers everything except cleaning. In many cases if you open the cabinet while the VCR is under warranty, you could oid that warranty; however, not much is likely to go wrong during the warranty Often you'll get a list of authorized centers and sometimes phone numbers to call when you buy your VCR. In some cases the place where you purchased the VCR will provide any warranty service. If the VCR you want to buy has no local ser 'ice centers, you'll have to box and ship the unit any time you need to have it repaired. is essential for you to now and practice. It is important for everyone, especially for beginners who might not now all of the potential dangers. Most of the circuits in the VCR present no danger to you. However, the power coming out of the wall outlet and going into the power supply can measure lethal olts. Getting a olt from the incoming olts ac ( Vac) is more than ust unpleasant; it can be fatal. Studies have shown that it takes ery little current to ill. Even a small amount of current can paralyze your muscles and you won't be able to let go. Just a fraction more and your heart muscle can become paralyzed. There is almost nothing mechanical in the VCR that can harm you. About the most that can happen is you'll get a pinched finger. There is however a greater threat to the VCR. Some of the parts can be easily damaged. Touching the wrong place can make a short circuit and cause a critical circuit to go up in smoke. Moving parts can get broken, bent, damaged, or nocked out of alignment. If any of these things happen, the VCR will not work correctly. If something goes wrong, more damage could result because all the parts (including the tape itself) Now that you are sufficiently frightened, relax. As long as you are careful, take your time, and follow rules of safety and common sense, you won't get into trouble. Learn where the dangerous spots are, stay away from them, and you'll have no problems. Before beginning any work inside the VCR, remove all ewelry, especially ewelry that dangles. A lot of ewelry is made of metal, which is electrically conductive. You might short a circuit or get shocked if a ring or necklace comes in contact with something it shouldn't. Every time you work on your VCR, exercise the following steps. Step . Unplugging your unit. Unplug the VCR before opening the cabinet. Doing this might mean having to reset the clock and other controls, but you can't possibly get shocked, and you won't accidentally cause a short circuit that can damage the VCR. The correct way to unplug any appliance or device is to grasp the plug. Never pull on the cord, which can cause it to pull loose from the plug. Holding plugs and probes. The potential danger from electricity begins at the outlet. Be careful. Any time you are inserting a plug or a probe (explained in chapter 5) into the outlet, be sure that your fingers are holding an insulated part. Locating the power supply If power must be on, be ery careful wherever electricity comes into the VCR, such as around the power supply. The power supply is usually located in a rear comer. Look to see where the power cord enters the machine and you'll find the power supply Step . Avoiding dangerous circuits. Be careful around fuses. Almost all fuses in VCRs are used to protect the VCR from olts ac. These fuses are located near the Step. . Probing inside your VCR. Metal probes and tools can cause short circuits and other damage. There is no danger if you' e unplugged the VCR, but at other times power will have to be present. At such times, paying attention to what you are doing becomes more important than ever. The chassis of your VCR might be metal. When you probe, be careful not to touch a test point and the metal chassis at the same time or you Avoiding contact with the ideo head assembly. When working inside the VCR, move slowly and carefully. s easy to cause damage to the delicate parts. Be especially careful around the ideo head assembly, and never touch it with your bare fingers. Touching the assembly in this manner can cause permanent damage; so can excessive pressure. Alignment of the assembly is critical. The heads mounted in the assembly are even more delicate. Probably the tools you'll need to troubleshoot and repair your VCR can be found around the house. None of the tools and materials are costly. The most expensive is the optional ; a unit costing about SIO to will be sufficient. Avoid buying poor- quality tools. A cheap screwdriver might do the ob ust as well as an expensive one; however, it also can cause you considerable trouble. There are reasons why a cheap tool is cheap. The materials used are of lower standards. The metal can bend and break, or the coating can flake off and fall inside the machine where it can do considerable damage. Invariably, the cabinet of the VCR will be held by Phillips-type screws, as are most internal shields and many other parts. The ideo cassette itself uses this ind of screw to hold it together. The head of a Phillips screwdriver is in the shape of an . Not needed as often but still handy is the standard blade-type screwdriver. In both cases, get a tool with a medium-sized head (about 1 4 inch) and one with a small-sized head (about 1 8 inch). The shaft length isn't important, but most people find a length of 4 to 6 inches to be the most convenient and ersatile. Be sure that the screwdrivers are not magnetized. The screwdriver should fit the screw, both for the length of the slot and for the width. The same is true of the Phillips screw and screwdriver. The head should fit the slot. Needle-nose pliers A pair of needle-nose pliers is good for light gripping, parts retrieval, and arious other tasks. A standard pair of pliers also might come in handy. In both cases, be sure that the handles This is the standard cleaning fluid. s inexpensive and relatively safe to use. For a VCR, be sure to get technical grade isopropyl alcohol with a purity of at least percent. Caution! Do not use alcohol on any rubber parts. Special cleaning fluids are more expensive than alcohol; however, they are often better cleaners. Get a cleaner that leaves no residue and is safe for rubber parts. Usually the label will tell you. The swabs used must be of the appropriate material. Those with threads, like cotton swabs, are ust barely tolerable for general inside cleaning. They should never be used on the ideo head assembly. Instead, use the foam swabs found in most electronics and Optical-grade chamois is suitable for cleaning the ideo head assembly. These can be purchased at optical stores and at some camera stores. Call around first; they're not always easy to find. You should not use automotive chamois because they might be chemically treated. always preferable, when possible. Sometimes, such as with some camcorders, you cannot get at some of the parts safely. At such times you'll need a cleaning cartridge. Use only the ohmmeter, also called a or multimeter, is used to measure oltage and resistance. It is an invaluable tool to have around the house because you can make power tests, continuity tests, and other tests. Most of the tests you'll be making will not require a high degree of accuracy, so an inexpensi 'e works fine. This final section deals with 'arious tools ou ma ' or mav not need. You don't have to buy any of these tools until the need arises. Many of the things ' ll need can be found around the house. A muffin tin or paper cups can be used to hold removed screws or other parts. A pair of scissors is needed for many tape repairs. ATien tape repairs are needed, buy 1 2 inch splicing tape meant specificallv for ideo tape. Unfortimateh' this tape isn't always easy to find. If ou can't find it, a suitable substitute is regular adhesive tape ( g., Scotch or "Magic Mend,") but these are not recommended because thev do not match the width as efficiently as the To help you make tape splices, invest in a splicing block. It holds the tape exactlv straight so you don't have to guess or fiddle. Splicing blocks used to be difficult to find for 1 inch ideo tape, but now Radio Shack and other supply stores are carr}'mg them. Be sure that the one you bu ' has the capability' of holding 1 inch The reason that you'll almost never hear about ideo tape splicing (other than in this book) is because s generally a bad idea and brings a danger to the VCR. Each time that splice goes across the ideo head assembly, it might cause damage. To reduce this risk, a repaired tape should be copied (dubbed), and the repaired original should be set aside to be used only as an emergency backup. To make this copy, you will need a pair of dubbing cables. These are usually about 3 feet long and have an RCA (phono) plug on each end. Your bare fingers should never touch the ideo tape. If you intend to make any repairs or do any splicing, get some lint-free gloves. These gloves are inexpensive and can be found at almost any the years, the most common complaints I' e heard are that the controls are too difficult and too confusing, and that the buttons are too small. Part of the problem is that there is little or no uniformity between manufacturers, and that even with the same manufacturer there might be significant differences between models. An entire book could be written about the controls and the ariations. All the possibilities still would not be covered. Don't be surprised if the illustrations that follow aren't exactly the same as the controls on your specific machine. Your best guide is the instruction manual for your specific make and model. Learning at least the basic controls and how they function is one of the first steps in both understanding your VCR and in troubleshooting it. VCRs are both different and much the same from model to model. Many of the controls, such as Play and Stop, are self explanatory. The Fast Forward and Rewind buttons usually have two functions. If the machine is in the Stop mode, these controls move the tape quickly forward or backward. If the machine is in the Play mode, these buttons perform a Search or Scan. The Record feature might require that you press Record and Play simultaneously, or it might be a single-button function (in which case the button is almost always red). Video cassette compartment Controls & Connectors Most VCRs also have a Timed Recording button (often located by itself on the right side). It is usually labeled with three letters, such as OTR (One-Touch Recording), IRT (Instant Recording Timer), or XPR (Express Recording). This button allows you to begin recording immediately without touching the Record button and to continue recording, usually in increments of or minutes. When the time has elapsed, the recording automatically stops. The Pause button brakes the tape movement, allowing you to hold the picture still. If the unit has a Frame Advance to iew the recording one frame at a time, it is usually located on the remote control rather than on the unit. Secondary cor tro door Front panel connections for audio ideo in out used to be fairly standard to make VCR- VCR copying easier. For a while this feature disappeared, but it is now Also on the front panel, the TV VCR switch allows you to use the VCR as a tuner. This capability is handy because sometimes the tuner section in the VCR gets better reception than the one in the television set. It also allows you to watch one channel on the television while recording on a different channel. (In this case, set up the VCR, start recording, press the TV VCR switch, and retune the television to whatever channel you wish to iew.) Controls & Connectors Auxiliary controls are located behind a door or panel, usually at the bottom of the front panel. Inside are the controls for other functions, such as programming. The exact procedure for using these controls aries widely from unit to unit. Setting the clock is usually much like setting any digital clock, and it must be done before any timed recordings can be made. To program those timed recordings, you must set a beginning time and an ending time, plus the day and often the choice of week. You also need to select the channel. Often the day, week, and channel will remain at the present settings unless you purposely change them. The tracking control adjusts the ideo head so that the path of the tape and the timing of the ideo heads match what is needed by the At least one control, the selector for the output channel of the VCR, is located in the back of the VCR. With rare exception, your choice will be limited to either channel 3 or 4. The channel you select depends on your location. If there is a strong local channel 3, but no channel 4, the output selector should be set to 4. Likewise, if you get good reception from the TV station on channel 4, the switch should be set to 3. If you get both, set the switch to whichever is the weakest. The purpose is to Also located in the back of the VCR are panel signal inputs and outputs, which are how outside signals (television, cable, etc.) get into the VCR for iewing or recording. With most units, you have your choice of connecting the incoming signals, such as from an antenna, either to the two screw-type ( ohm) connectors or to the single cable ( type) composite connector. The same is true for sending the VCR's signal to the television set. Chapter 9 discusses connections and gives you more information on the wires, cables, and connectors needed. Controls & Connectors Screw type " ohm connector The four audio ideo inputs outputs are aluable features that many people never use. (Chapter 9 shows you how.) The most common use is when two VCRs are hooked together to make dubs. In some cases these connectors are the preferred way to connect the VCR to a television. The audio out also can be used to send the sound through your home stereo—a handy tip if your VCR is monaural and you want to simulate stereo, or if you ust want the better sound of the larger speakers. Imagine trying to fix a car without having any idea about what makes it work. You generally don't need this understanding if you will be merely operating the device or machine, but the nowledge is essential when it comes to troubleshooting and repairing. Your goal isn't to learn how to design and engineer a VCR. All you need to now are the basics of how it operates. For example, the clock timer of the VCR is operated by one or more electronic chips (integrated circuits) and related circuitry. You do not need to now how to design such a circuit to be able to push the buttons that set this clock timer. Likewise, you don't need to now how to design a power supply to understand what it does and how to make the simple tests to see if it is working. Learning how a VCR works isn't difficult. Your greatest enemy is "high-tech intimidation." Being cautious and recognizing your honest limitations is wise. Being intimidated to the point that you feel totally incompetent isn't necessary. Up until now you' e probably ust shoved a cassette into the VCR, pressed Play, watched the movie, and never thought much about how it all happened. Because you bought this book, you must have at least some interest in learning how things work. In chapter 6 you'll learn how to open the VCR so you can see it in operation if you wish. Seeing the VCR in operation while it is in good condition will give you aluable nowledge and clues for when things The major internal parts of the VCR include the erase head, ideo head assembly, linear audio head, rollers, capstans, guide pins, and other parts. These parts are illustrated in chapter 6. When you insert a cassette into a VCR, a switch is tripped causing the VCR to "grab" the cassette, pull it inside, and lower it into position. As this happens, a pin slides into a hole in the bottom of the cassette, releasing the reels. Another pin releases the door catch on the cassette so the door can be opened. Eject does the same thing but in reverse. Play or Record causes arious mechanisms to pull the tape from the cassette and place it correctly in the tape path. Pressing Stop does the same thing but in reverse, with the tape being placed back into the cassette. The door will stay open until the cassette is ejected When you get through chapter 6, compare your own machine while playing to these illustrations. Use caution because the cover will be off while power is being applied. Tape recording, whether it be with an audio cassette or in a VCR, uses magnetism. Recording is done with a small electromagnet called the record playback head (or heads). The tape consists of a plastic base on which there is a coating of magnetic particles. These particles are extremely small. Great care must be taken during manufacture that they are evenly distributed on the base and that the binder used will eep them there. The first ensures a better recording. The second reduces dropouts and also reduces damage to the machine. A dropout is caused when flakes of the coating fall off the tape. Any magnetic field recorded there falls off with the flake. What you see on the screen as a result is a small white speck. If the problem is bad enough, the image on the TV might seem to almost sparkle. This indicates that the tape is either of poor quality or is old and worn. (The same symptom could mean that the ideo heads are in bad need of a cleaning.) No matter how well the tape is made, however, a little of that coating is left behind on the parts of the VCR each time; a well-made tape will leave minimal deposits. These deposits are one reason why regular cleaning is necessary. illustration showing the recording of an audio signal. The sound waves originating from the speaker hit the microphone, which causes the microphone to produce an electrical current that is "in step" with the sound itself. This current is then amplified so that it can drive an electromagnet. An electromagnet is a device that converts electricity into magnetic fields. These fields fluctuate with arious signals, which affects magnetic particles on the tape. The magnetic particles store (record) the arying fields. The tape is in actual physical contact with the electromagnet In playback, the stored fields recorded on the tape move over the playback electromagnet. The magnetic fields now cause an electrical current that is the same as the one that originally caused the recorded fields. (The tape is nearly in actual physical contact with the The high complexity and frequency range of the ideo signal requires extremely high fidelity, which requires a high tape speed. In the home VCR high fidelity is accomplished by moving the tape forward slowly and spinning the ideo head quickly. The head is tilted so that the tape crosses it at an angle. The top half of the ideo head drum spins ery fast in a clockwise direction while the bottom half remains stationary. This motion causes the ideo signal to be recorded and played back as diagonal stripes. To eep everything working properly, a sync or cue track is necessary. The purpose of this track is to eep the tape and the VCR, and the VCR and television, in step with each other. The audio track is a linear strip at the top of the tape (with the stereo audio track, if there is one, recorded as diagonals much the same as the ideo). The sync track is a linear strip at the bottom. If this track is damaged, the VCR will play badly, if it plays at all. Most of the motors are located beneath the VCR. Often they are connected to the devices they drive by a system of pulleys and belts. Sometimes the motor that loads and unloads the cassette does its ob through a system of gears. As with other operations, remove the top cover of your VCR and watch this happen. Again, be careful! The cover must be off while power is flowing in the VCR. Troubleshooting is a step- step process of elimination. Once you' e eliminated all the places where the problem is not, you find out where it is. Some examples of common VCR malfunctions are given in this chapter. At times the procedures for solving common problems require tests inside the VCR with the power on. Be Careful! (Refer to chapter 1.) If you don't feel competent to do something that even might be dangerous to you or the VCR, don't do it! Call a professional technician. The process always begins with the simple and progresses to the more complex. Start by looking for the obvious. Where you begin is determined by the general symptoms. For example, if the VCR is completely dead, trying a different cassette in the machine won't help. Likewise, if you obviously have power to the VCR, checking the house fuses or circuit breakers is a waste of time. Once you' e determined what is going wrong, you can begin to find out why the VCR is malfunctioning and what to do about it. A troubleshooting list, such as the one in the owner's manual or the one at the beginning of this chapter, can help. The VCR system consists of three parts: the VCR itself, the tapes it plays or records, and the television set. Sometimes what seems to be a serious problem with the VCR or TV is actually nothing more than a bad tape. Often in the following steps, you'll be advised to try another cassette that you now is good. This same "test tape" can be used to make adjustments and is a aluable tool for eeping track of how well the VCR is operating. Voltohm-milliammeter ( ) Fuse or circuit breaker blown Short circuit somewhere in VCR Cassette has played to the end Cassette has played or recorded Record-protect tab has been Improper control operation Basic Troubleshooting Bad cables or connectors Tracking is maladjusted Worn or damaged sync track A tape with particles flaking off (an indication that tape is occurring at the top) Overpowering copyguard Step . Making a test tape. Making a test tape is easy. The total cost involved is the price of a cassette. Make a recording of anything you wish while the VCR is in good operating condition. Make recordings at each of the three speeds. You also can repeat the sections by recording for minutes on the fastest speed ( hour mode), minutes on the middle speed ( hour mode) and minutes on the slowest speed ( hour mode), then repeat the sequence throughout the tape. If a part of the tape gets damaged, you'll be able to remove the damaged section and still have a alid test tape (see chapter 8). Label the tape "Test" or something similar, then set it aside until it is needed. Basic Troubleshooting obvious when nothing happens. Troubleshooting begins by checking the obvious. If nothing at all is happening, look to see if the unit is plugged in. If it is plugged in, is it turned on? Another possibility is that the outlet is dead. Test the outlet by plugging something such as a Checking the wall switch. If the outlet is dead, first look to see if the outlet is operated by a wall switch. Some homes have switches so that plug-in lamps can be turned on from a switch. For a more accurate test for power, a ( oltohm-milliammeter) can be used. Set the dial to read in the olts ac range. Insert the probes into the outlet slots (being careful to hold the probes only by the insulation). Because the wall outlet has ac oltage, it doesn't matter which probe goes in which slot. Basic Troubleshooting fuse or circuit breaker. Usually you can see if the fuse wire is melted by looking through the "window" of the fuse. A popped circuit breaker might not be quite so easy to see. Normally the lever will be slightly back, but sometimes so slight that it is difficult to see. When in doubt, flip the breaker completely off and back on again. Changing the VCR fuse. If the outlet is good but the VCR still won't "power up," the fuse in the VCR might be blown. You will have to open the cabinet to get at the fuse (see chapter 5). As with the household fuse, you can usually ust look through the glass to see if the fuse wire Step . Testing the fuse with a . Sometimes a fuse will look good when it is actually bad. If you suspect this, shut off all power and unplug the VCR. Remove the fuse from its holder. Set your to read resistance; any range will do. Touch the probes to each end of the fuse. You should get a reading of nearly zero ohms. If the fuse shows a high resistance, it has "blown" and must be Basic Troubleshooting Step . Testing for power going into the power supply. The final tests involve the power supply. Be ery careful doing these tests. The unit has to be plugged in, with the VCR power on. First, set the dial of the to test for ac in the - olt range. Carefully touch the two probes to the spots where the incoming power cord is soldered. You can find these spots by simply looking at where the power cord enters the machine and following the cord inside. If you don't read approximately olts ac, no power is getting to the unit. Either the outlet is dead, the cord is no good, or the soldered oints are bad. Step . Testing for power coming out of the power supply. If power is getting to the power suppl ', is it coming out? How ou find out depends on how your ^CR is built. Usually you only have to find where the wires come out of the po er supply and look where they attach to a circuit board. Set the to read dc 'oltage in a range above olts (but not too far above). Basically, if power is coming in to the power supply but none is coming out ou no that the problem is in the po er supply. If power is coming out, and the 'CR isn't working, the problem is somewhere in the VCR circuits. You might be able to make some tests by locating other test points on the circuit boards. Sometimes ou can to determine which circuit board is at fault. Basic Troubleshooting Step . Making sure the cassette is loaded correctly. If you are getting power to the unit but it refuses to play, make sure you have a cassette in the VCR. Most VCRs have a light or some other indicator to show that a cassette is in. The cassette must be inserted with the label-side up; the door covering the tape must go in first. If the cassette is inserted in any other way, the VCR will not be able to load it, even if the VCR senses the cassette being inserted. Step . Examining the cassette for damage. Check the cassette itself. Is it of the right format? (A Beta cassette will not load into a VHS machine and ice ersa.) Then isually examine the cassette for signs of warping or other damage. Set that cassette aside and try your test tape. If the second cassette loads and the other one will not, the problem is not with the VCR but with that first cassette. Ejecting and reinserting the cassette. s possible that the cassette loaded, but it didn't load flat. If s " inked" on the platform, the VCR won't work. Try ejecting the cassette and then loading Step . Checking the reels. If all the tape is on the right-hand reel, the cassette has already played to the end. You'll have to rewind the tape before you can play it. Basic Troubleshooting Step . Examining the tape inside the cassette. Press the lock button, located on the right-hand side ust behind the door, and raise the door. Look at the tape. Does it show damage? If it does, you' e located the problem. The damage doesn't have to be extensive to cause trouble. For example, if the damage is to the sync track (at the bottom of the tape), the VCR will have a difficult or impossible time trying to play the tape. Step . Checking the record-protect tab. If the tape will play but it refuses to record, eject the cassette and look at the back edge. The cassette has a record-protect tab on the left side. If this tab is in place, you can record on the tape (which means you should break this tab off to protect any alued recording). You will not be able to record if the tab is missing. If you are certain you wish to record on this cassette, you can cover the hole with a strip of adhesive tape. Checking the TV VCR switch. Most VCRs will automatically change the TV VCR switch when "Play" is started. To be sure, find this control on the front panel and press the button. If the image on the television doesn't change, s not getting a signal from the VCR. Basic Troubleshooting Checking the channel selector. On the back of the VCR is a channel selector switch that allows you to select if the VCR will output on channel 3 or channel 4 (depending on which is acant in your area). This switch and the TV must be set to the same channel. Checking the cables and connectors. If there is no picture or no sound, yet the television is definitely on and functioning, check the cables and connectors. If they are connected correctly, you might have to remove the cable and test them. (Chapter 9 will show you how.) Checking for programming errors. If a timed or programmed recording didn't work, chances are nearly that you did something wrong when setting the controls. Look over the arious programming controls and study the owner's manual of your Step . Adjusting the tracking. If the tape is playing but the picture is distorted or streaked, adjust the tracking (in both directions). With some of the newer VCRs, the information used to control tracking and other functions is stored in special electronic chips. Fiddling with the controls can change the "default" settings, making it difficult or impossible to adjust the tracking far enough to get a clear picture. The cure in such a case is to unplug the machine. Leave it unplugged for at least seconds. Basic Troubleshooting Step . Abandoning an overpowering copyguard signal. Also for a distorted picture, eject the cassette and examine encoded copyguard might be so strong that your VCR will play the tape, but the VCR and or TV will receive an over-powering copyguard signal that ruins the playback. Try another cassette and see if it cures Listening to your VCR. One of the most frustrating problems is when the VCR mangles a tape, either during play or more often during eject. The easiest way to prevent or minimize damage is to learn to listen to the sounds your VCR makes as it loads, plays, and unloads. If the sound is different, something might be going wrong inside. If, by the sounds you hear, you suspect that the tape might not have been pulled back into the cassette when you pressed Stop, press Play again. Let the tape move back into the tape path and begin to play, then press Stop again. Listen for the sound. (A clicking sound indicates that the tape has returned to its proper track with most VCRs.) Turning the power off to prevent tape destruction. If you're still not certain that the tape has been returned to the cassette properly, turn off the VCR. Cutting the power, especially in older VCRs, allows certain springs to complete the ob of pulling the tape back inside the cassette. If this condition happens often, s a sign that the springs are wearing, because they are not operating reliably while tension is applied. The springs might have to be replaced. Because of the ariety of springs and their locations, this ob should be left to a professional technician (unless you have a technical manual for your particular VCR and a good source of parts). Basic Troubleshooting Step . Watching as the VCR plays. If the problem of tape eating is persistent, open the VCR and watch it go through a load, play, and unload sequence. Do this several times, watching for things that might be causing the problem. Checking the idler assembly. Many VCRs use an idler assembly with a rubber tire on a spring- loaded wheel (see chapter 7). If this tire is worn or if it is becoming overly dry, the VCR might put most, but not all, of the tape back into the cassette. Look inside your VCR to see if it has something that looks e 'en remotely like the illustration. If so, turn to chapter 7. Don't forget that the television is a part of the overall system. It could be that the VCR is operating perfectly and that the problem is with the television set. Is it on? Does it work? Basic Troubleshooting Step . Changing cassette lengths. The standard VHS cassette can hold up to six hours of ideo. People demanded more, which brought about the cassette. This cassette can hold up to eight hours of ideo. It uses a tape that is more thin than usual. This thin tape might be moving through the path less reliably. If you are using these tapes, try switching to the standard cassettes. Step . Cleaning your machine. Another common cause of VCR malfunction is excessive filth inside the machine. You might or might not be able to see what is causing the problem. Either way, thoroughly clean the inside of your VCR, including the entire tape path, and the ideo and audio heads (see chapter 5). Checking your remote control unit. These days almost every VCR comes with a wireless remote control. Some use ultrasonics, but most operate using infrared signals. Both are invisible and perfectly safe. Infrared- type remote controls operate in line- sight. The signal can be blocked if something is between the remote control and the VCR. Excessive distance between the two might also Step . Changing worn-out batteries in your remote control. The most common cause of remote control failure, including intermittent operation, is a worn (or wearing) battery. Open the battery compartment and replace the battery (or batteries). Pay close attention to the polarity (the + and - labels). With single-cell batteries (AAA, AA, C and D, etc.—although the latter two are never used in a VCR remote control) the positive (+) side is the post; the negative (-) is the flat side. Basic Troubleshooting Step . Cleaning the lenses. In rare cases, the lens of the remote control unit, or the receiving lens on the VCR, might be so dirty that the signals are partially blocked. Clean the lenses with a clean, soft cloth and a cleaning fluid safe for plastic. Mechanical things have a common enemy—dirt. If a machine is allowed to get dirty and stay dirty, it won't operate correctly. It could stop working, and it might suffer permanent damage. When VCRs are ept clean, they work better, last longer, and During recording or playback, the ideo and audio heads of your VCR are in direct physical contact with ideo tape. The manufacturing processes for tape have improved, but there is no such thing as perfection. The physical movement of the tape across the parts leaves behind tiny particles. These particles build up over time. Unless you clean them away, the deposits can cause real trouble. The ey is preventive maintenance. Protect your VCR the best you can. Give it a thorough cleaning on a regular basis. The alcohol must be "technical grade," which means that it must be of at least purity, and preferably higher. The cleaning solvent can be used for cleaning all parts, but it is essential for cleaning the rubber parts. The swabs must be of the proper materials and have no threads. Step . Cleaning the cabinet and loading platform. Clean the cabinet with a cloth to reduce the amount of dust that seeps inside and to eep the VCR looking more attractive. Also clean the loading platform with the cloth; use a swab to clean the corners. Your goal is to be sure that the inserted cassettes do not drag contaminants into the machine. Keep the VCR covered when not in use, but remove the cover when you are using the machine. Cleaning Your Machine Step . Getting inside. The instruction manuals that come with VCRs do not tell you how to get inside them. {Caution: Opening the cabinet while the VCR is still under warranty could oid that warranty!) With most VCRs, the top cover is held in place by two or four screws. If only two screws are used, they will be at the back. These screws generally go down through the top, but there also might be screws in the back or sides. Remove the screws carefully and put them in a safe place. Lift at the rear while gently pulling backwards to release the lip that holds the cover at the front of the VCR. If the cover doesn't lift easily, carefully inspect the VCR for screws you' e missed. (In a few cases, there might not be any holding screws on top. The screws might be in the back or more rarely Step . Removing the shield. Inside some VCRs have a metal shield over the head assembly and tape path, which must be removed to get at the parts beneath. The shield is usually held in place by o screws and two thumb catches. Other VCRs have a partial shield or lack a shield entirely. Remove the screws and put them in a safe place. Be careful not to let them fall into the VCR. (The screws are ery small so s easy to lose your hold on them. You can use a pair of needle-nose pliers to hold the screws while removing them. Do not squeeze hard because you can damage the threads.) Use your thumbs to release the two thumb catches. Do not force them. If the catches do not release, try pressing gently downward on the shield while working the catches. Carefully lift the shield; there are usually delicate wires near by. Once you' e removed the top cover and shield (if any), you can get at the audio head, ideo head, and tape path. Cleaning Your Machine 3e careful of wlree around Step . Cleaning the ideo head assembly. Wet a swab with cleaning fluid and then press it against the inside of the bottle to squeeze out the excess. (Do not use cotton swabs on the ideo head assembly.) Gently hold the swab steady against the assembly while rotating the assembly with your finger. Do not apply much pressure. Let the cleaning fluid do the work, not the pressure. It is best if you wear a lint-free glove when doing this work. Cleaning Your Machine Cleaning the audio and erase heads. If the audio and erase heads are separate from the ideo head assembly, they should be cleaned too, again, the ey is to be gentle and to let the cleaning fluid do the work. Do not scrub! {Caution: Do not use alcohol on rubber parts! Alcohol will cause them to dry out and decompose.) Cleaning the rollers. The rubber rollers will dry and age no matter what you do. Oxide deposits from the tape will cause this condition to happen sooner. By cleaning the rollers each time you clean the heads, you can add years of life to the VCR. Gently move the wetted swab around the roller. As always, let the cleaning fluid do the work. Cleaning the capstans. Deposits might not show on the metal capstans, but cleaning them is still important. As with the rollers, move the wetted swab around the capstans, then up and down. Cleaning Your Machine Cleaning the platform. While the VCR is open, slightly dampen a swab with isopropyl alcohol or cleaning fluid and clean away dust and lint from the platform and other parts. Be careful to remove ust this and not the factory Step . Cleaning the cable connectors. Sometimes the only problem is that the cable connectors need to be cleaned. Larger connectors, such as those that connect the VCR to the television set, can be cleaned with alcohol or cleaning fluid and a swab. Some connectors, such as those for circuit boards, have delicate pins. You should use a spray cleaner for these so that the pins don't get bent or damaged. s relatively rare that the connectors need cleaning. Do so only when necessary. Step . Cleaning circuit board connectors. To remove a circuit board connector, first inspect it for any catches, holding screws, etc. Grasp it with a finger and thumb. Hold the circuit board with your other hand to prevent it from moving. Pull gently; do not force it! To spray clean the connector, spray away from yourself. Use the spray sparingly. Don't forget to clean the connector on the circuit board. (Caution. Do not use a spray cleaner with any ind of lubricant in it. Read the label carefully.) Cleaning Your Machine Step . Cleaning a connecting strip. A few circuit boards, usually in older VCRs, might have a connecting strip rather than pins. Cleaning these is much the same as cleaning pin- type connectors. You can use a swab and fluid or a spray cleaner. Things work in a certain way for a specific reason. When something fails, there is a reason for it. For example, if a motor drives a device and the two are connected ia a belt between two pulleys—and if this belt breaks—it doesn't matter if both the motor and device are in perfect condition, because neither can perform its function without that belt. The placement of a particular part might be different in your VCR, but its function is often ery much the same. In many cases the diagnosis is little more than a matter of looking. A broken belt can be easily spotted. Even if you' e never seen the inside of the machine, figuring out where the broken belt came from is usually ust a matter of The same is true of other problems. A part might be obviously broken or bent. A roller might be discolored from excessive oxide buildup or it might be cracking indicating age and wear Even the components and circuit boards sometimes reveal the cause of their You should first determine the symptoms—what is happening or not happening. If you think it will help, write a list of the symptoms, along with your best guesses as to what might be causing the problem. This will help you to eliminate where the problem is not. Visually examine the VCR. First inspect the outside of your VCR; remember that the whole problem could be something as simple as a cable that has become disconnected. Always begin with the obvious and the most simple. Step . Remove the cabinet and look inside. Remove the cabinet as instructed in Step . Visually examine the internal components of the unit. In this exaggerated example, notice that a wire on one of the connectors is broken, that a capacitor on a circuit board has broken open and burned, and that somehow a paper Idlers, Belts & Other Parts Many VCRs use an idler assembly to help control tape movement. This small device is usually mounted on a pin between the two reels. The idler assembly loosely flips back and forth between the reels. If it wears, tape movement might not be reliable. The result is often mangled tapes. Most idlers have a rubber tire; some use a geared wheel instead. If yours has a gear, the following steps can be skipped. Cleaning the idler assembly. Using a swab and cleaning fluid that is safe for rubber, clean the rubber tire. Rotate the wheel and tire with a finger while gently scrubbing the tire with the wetted swab. Step . Removing the idler assembly for changing or cleaning. Remove the idler assembly ^ith your fingers or a pair of needle-nose pliers. The most common ind of mounting is to have a spring-loaded clip that holds the device in place. To release the clip, push the catch toward the pin. While holding this catch in, carefully lift the idler assembly upwards. Cleaning the tire is easier and usually more thorough with the assembly removed. If cleaning doesn't solve the problem, replace the tire. An exact match is needed. Parts supply stores that carry idler tires can usually make this match by either the make and model of the VCR or by physical measurement. The make and model can be found in your owner's manual or on a sticker located either behind the VCR or beneath it. Ueed noee pliers here or here Idlers, Belts & Other Parts Place your fingers on Step . Changing the idler tire. The groove in the wheel holds the tire in place. The tire must be worked over the wider rim of the wheel. This is easiest when you begin the tire on one side and squeeze it into the groove while rotating the wheel. Be sure that the tire is completely in the groove and is flat. Check for any inks or twists. Replacing the assembly is ust the reverse of removing it. Push the clip back, slide the assembly over the pin and release the catch. Try lifting the assembly out afterwards to be sure that it is properly in place and that the catch is holding. Idlers, Belts & Other Parts Locating the belts in your VCR. Most of the belts and motors are located beneath the VCR. Wherever they are located their ob is to transfer the action of a motor to some device. The belt fits into the groove of a pulley on the motor, and into the groove of a pulley on the device. To get to the belts beneath your VCR, you have to remove the lower cover. To do this, first ery carefully Step . Removing the bottom cover. The bottom cover is held with 4, 5, or 6 screws. The most common pattern is to have a screw in each of the four corners and one near the center. Remove the screws and put them in a safe place. If you also still have the top cover and shield off be sure that each set of screws is labeled. Once the screws are removed, the bottom cover will lift off easily. If it doesn't, examine the VCR thoroughly to find out what you' e missed. Don't force anything. With the bottom cover removed, you can get at the belts, motors, etc. Idlers, Belts & Other Parts Each time you open the bottom of the VCR, check the belts isually and run your finger along them. The belts should show no signs of wear, nor should they be loose. If you feel the belt tension while the VCR is in good working condition, you'll be able to recognize signs of stretching or loosening Step . Removing belts. Usually, you can change belts with ust your fingers. Carefully remove the old belt, noting its exact placement. Make a sketch if you think it will help you. The replacement belt must be exact. As with the idler tire, obtaining this part can be done with the make and model. If you' e lost the owner's manual, the make and model number are usually listed on the sticker located either in the back or on the bottom of the VCR, or you can note the physical dimensions of the belt to be replaced. Be aware that if the belt has stretched, the physical dimensions won't be accurate. Often belt replacements come in a replacement it, which contains most or all of the belts needed in a Idlers, Belts & Other Parts Step . Changing belts. To install the replacement belt, you can usually ust stretch it into place. If you have difficulty, set the belt in the groove of one pulley, start it in the groove of the other, and rotate that second pulley so that the belt slides into the groove. Be sure that the belt is securely in the grooves of both pulleys and that there are no twists in the belt. If you do not have access to a parts store, you can temporarily cure a slipping belt with a piece of resin, beeswax, or paraffin. Hold the wax against the inside of the belt between the pulleys and rotate one of the pulleys so that the belt rubs against the substance. This will add some stickiness to the belt so you can eep it working for a few days until you can get a replacement belt. Caution! Only use a ery small amount of the substance, and make sure it goes only on the belt. Cassettes are an integral and important part of the ideo system. They are also one of the most delicate parts of the ideo system and the one most likely to cause trouble. Many things can go wrong with a cassette or the tape contained in manufactured poorly, which can mean anything from a warped case or low-quality tape to a missing spring that was never installed. Even the best-made cassettes wear in time. Accidents like spilling liquid on a cassette or exposing it to heat also can cause problems. Bad tape can cause damage to the VCR by leaving excessive deposits or having a "sandpaper" effect on your machine. A tangled tape also can cause damage, especially if you become impatient and begin yanking on it. Rental and borrowed tapes bring yet another potential danger to your VCR. As a tape goes through a VCR it leaves behind small deposits, and it also can pick up dirt, dust, and grime. These can be transferred into the next VCR that uses the tape. In other words, whatever is in someone else's VCR can be moved into your VCR. Protecting your investment begins by buying only quality cassettes. You don't have to buy the most expensive cassettes available. Tests have shown that at times quality has little to do with cost. Buying quality tapes means staying with the nown brands and avoiding the off-brands or store brands. Words like "supreme quality" or "professional" don't necessarily mean anything. In general, if you see a tape being offered by only one store, s not what you're looking for. A brand that can be found almost anywhere is more likely to be reliable. The best cassette won't last long if you abuse it. Cassettes are sensiti 'e to magnetism, heat, cold, moisture, dust and other things. Your task is to protect the cassette as best you can. Keeping your VCR clean helps you accomplish this task (see chapter 6). Step . Rewinding the tape. Completely rewind the tape before storage. Also some experts suggest that if a tape has been stored for a long period of time, completely fast-forward and then rewind before playing it to repack the tape inside the cassette. Although this much effort isn't always needed, it is sometimes a good idea. Step . Keeping your cassettes in cases. The door side of the cassette should be inserted into the case first. The most 'ulnerable part of the cassette is then deepest into the box where it is best protected. Special hard boxes are available that seal the cassette inside more completely. To further protect your tapes, store them in a VCR case or cabinet. Open storage racks are fine for storing, but they do little to protect the cassettes. Storing cassettes on end. Store your cassettes ertically with the supply reel at the bottom. Do not Step . Avoiding troublesome conditions. Keep tapes away from magnets, speakers, and even your telephone. Also, do not store tapes where there is excessive heat, cold, sunlight, or moisture. Cassettes exposed to these elements will warp. Although there are'sUght differences in manufacture and construction, most cassettes are ery much the same. The top of the cassette has a space for the label and clear iewing windows. The square button releases the catch for the door. The bottom of the cassette has arious notches and holes. Note in particular the brake release (reel release) hole and the locations of the screws that hold the cassette together. The inside consists of a supply reel, a take-up reel, guide rollers, springs, and a locking "paddle" that controls tape direction. The cassette also might have a thin sheet of plastic over the tape to give the tape a smoother, slicker surface on which to move. No matter how well you care for your VCR and tapes, sooner or later you're going to have a tape get tangled inside. You can reduce the chances of this happening by following the steps provided for proper storage and care of cassettes, but you won't be able to completely eliminate the problem, especially if you rent tapes often. Sometimes you can prevent the tangle from ever happening by paying attention to the sounds your VCR makes (see Step ). If your tape does get tangled, straightening it out usually isn't difficult; it simply requires care and patience. For all of the following steps, do not touch the tape with your bare fingers. Use lint-free cotton gloves available in photo supply stores. Step . Extracting the loose tape. If you eject the tape and see that the tape is still outside the cassette and it is now caught, do not pull. Open the door to the VCR and look inside, there might be loose tape that you If you can't tell if the tangle is serious or not, ery gently pull the tape to see if it will come out of the VCR. If it doesn't come out easily, Step . Manually rewind the cassette. If the tape comes out of the VCR with little damage done to it, you can simply wind it back inside the cassette. Press the door-release catch on the side of the cassette and prop it open with a pencil or similar object. Insert your finger into the reel at the bottom of the cassette and turn it to bring the tape inside the cassette. If one reel doesn't turn, try the other one. If neither reel moves, you might have to insert a pencil into the reel (brake) release hole. Step . Opening the VCR. If the tangle is bad, you will have to remove the top cover of the VCR. Visually examine the inside of the VCR. Before you begin trying to untangle the tape, try to spot where the tape is caught. Propping open the doors of the cassette and VCR. If the tape doesn't come out easily, you might need both hands to work with the tape. Letting the door close on the tape can cause additional damage. An eraser or similar object can be used to hold the door open so that both of your hands are free. Step . Extracting the tape from the VCR. Very gently get the tape loose and pull it out of the VCR. Then, as in Step , wind it back inside the cassette. s important that you do all of this gently and eep the tape as straight as possible. Never force or If there was little or no damage done to the tape, you can probably get by with using the Fast Forward and Rewind controls to bring the tape all the way to each end. (Doing this twice is advisable ust to make sure the tape is packed tightly on the reel.) If the damage is more severe and the recording is so aluable that you cannot scrap it, you have three ways to repair it: you can make an tape repair, a repair at the leader, or a tape swap. Each method has advantages and disadvantages. In all, tape repair is a last resort when the recording is too aluable to lose because you risk causing damage to the VCR. You should attempt repair only when the recording is of more alue to you than the VCR itself. Set the original aside, to be used only in an emereencv Yon- r quality in playback with the dub, but you., ^oTc^^LXckTJ^^^ me the repaired sections move across the ideo head ou rfsk causi". permanent damage to the VCR. ' "''' '' """ '™P'"^' ''"^ '-^^^f «^ffi"™t "method of ideo tape repair, because the place uhere the two pieces of tape are oined Making the repair at one of the two clear leaders is safer than making an tape repair, because it reduces the chances of the splice going across the ideo heads. You can save all of the tape before or after the damaged section with this method, but if you need the whole recording from beginning to end, this option would not work. See Step for instructions on this method. When you want to avoid an tape splice and still eep the original recording intact, you can purchase a second cassette for a tape swap. After you repair a tape, regardless of which method you use, you should make a copy of the original. See Step for details. tape for an tape splice. Prop open the front door of the cassette with a pencil. If necessary, insert another pencil into the reel-release hole located on the bottom of the cassette. Pull some tape from the cassette. Carefully cut away the damaged section. s best to use a splicing block if you can find one that is suitable for 1 inch ideo tape. erlap the two ends of ideo tape and carefully slice through both with a sharp razor blade. Your goal is to slice the two loose ends so that they match exactly. Many professionals prefer a degree angle because it provides more surface area for the splicing tape to cover. Brush away the trimmed excess. Adhering the ends together. Apply splicing tape to the nonoxide side (inside) of the ideo tape. Be sure that both ends of the ideo tape are the same width, that the inside of both is up, and that the tape is not twisted. Actual 1 inch splicing tape is preferred because it matches the width of the ideo tape exactly; however, it is hard to find. A quality adhesive tape (cellophane, such as Scotch) can be used if the splicing tape cannot be found. The ends of the ideo tape must match exactly so that there is no splicing tape in a gap between the two ends or beyond the edges. If necessary, carefully trim the excess splicing tape; using a splicing block makes precise trimming much easier to accomplish. back in the cassette. Carefully wind the spliced tape inside the cassette. Again fast forward and rewind to each end of the tape at least once and preferably twice to firmly pack the tape on the Making the repair at the leader. Cut the tape ust before the damaged area and then cut the tape at the clear leader; discard the tape. Splice the tape to the leader. Your tape becomes much shorter, but the splice will not pass over the ideo head and risk damage Step . Disassembling cassettes for a tape swap. For this repair, you must obtain a new cassette. Disassemble both the new cassette and the damaged cassette by removing the screws from the bottom of the cassettes with a fine-tipped PhilHps screwdriver, such as a eweler's screwdriver. Make sure both halves stay together, because there are tiny parts inside that can fall out. Carefully turn both cassettes over with the label-side down. Separate the top and bottom halves. Step . Discarding the new tape. Cut out and discard all of the tape in the new cassette at the leaders at each reel. Your goal is to get two empt}- reels with clear leaders. Step . Swapping the reels. As in Step , carefully cut away the damaged tape section. With both cassettes open, lift out the partially filled take-up reel and swap it with the empty reel of the new cassette. In each cassette, splice the tape to the clear leader as in Step . You now have the first part of the recording in one cassette and the second part of the recording in Step . Reassembling the cassettes. Reassemble both cassettes by putting the top and bottom halves together again and replacing the screws. Fast forward and rewind both cassettes, again at least once and preferably twice. Especially if you' e made an tape repair, it is important to dub the repaired tape. A splice crossing the ideo heads can cause considerable damage. To make a copy, you need a pair of dubbing cables with RCA- type phono plugs on each end and two VCRs. Connect the Audio Out of one VCR to the Audio In of the other. Likewise connect the Video Out of the first to the Video In of the second. The signals from the first VCR are now going into the second VCR, allowing it to record what the first VCR plays. Make a complete dub and then store the repaired originals for emergency use only. lone a VCR is useless. To record, a VCR must be connected to an incoming signal; to play back, it must be connected to a Ltelevision set; and if it is capable of stereo sound, the left and right channel outputs must be properly connected either to a stereo television or a home stereo system. All of the basic cables are included when you buy a new VCR. These cables are adequate for a standard hookup. You can buy additional wires, cables, and connectors to make your VCR more ersatile. For example, you might want to use two or more input signals (local antenna, cable, satellite dish, etc.). You might want a single VCR to drive two or more television sets (and at each of these, you might again want a selection as to which input the TV will show). You also might want to connect two VCRs together for dubbing taped There are many different inds of wire, cable, and connectors. What you need depends on your particular system and how you wish to use it. You can find different connectors and transformers at your local Step . Examining your ' s input output terminals. Look behind your YCR for the input output terminals. Most 'CRs have three different inds of terminals: the scre "head pe, the threaded tvpe, and a nonthreaded push-on t 'pe. The screwhead tvpe of terminal accepts the older ohm twin lead from a television antenna. The threaded tvpe of terminal with scre threads and a small hole is for ohm coaxial cable used with cable or satellite tele ision and ^ ith a standard tele 'ision antenna that has been equipped ^ ith a transformer (see Step ). The side- side push-on connectors ^ ith the larger hole have separate audio and ideo signals and are used when dubbing from one 'CR to another, or when ou wish to connect the VCR's audio (sound) to your home stereo system. Determining your connectors. Just as there are different inputs outputs, there are different connectors on the wires or cables. The ohm twin lead from a television antenna will have (or should have) shaped spade lugs that fit beneath the screws. The ohm coaxial cable will have an typed connector (also called an RF connector). The connector used for dubbing or sending audio to the stereo is an RCA-type plug. The type connector (also called an RF connector) is far more efficient. Like the ohm twin-lead, this connector carries the entire (composite) ideo and audio signals, but through a coaxial cable that provides an impedance of ohms. Once again, you don't have to worry about what this means, only that you cannot directly connect the ohm cable to the ohm antenna. Xote the connectors for signal input, output on the "CR. In nnost cases ou will need only the ohm or the ohm in each direction—not both. The exception is that Some 'CRs require a separate UHF input. E "en if yours has inputs for both, tr ' reception first with a single input through the XTiF connector(s). This will probably work fine. Step . Understanding cables and connectors. Finally, not only must the connectors match, so must the wire or cable that carries the signal from the source to the input. Spade lugs are used on ohm twin lead. This wire consists of two stranded conductors that run side by side and are separated by insulating plastic. It has been used for a long time because a standard television antenna has a natural impedance of ohms. You don't have to now what this means, only that you cannot directly connect a ohm source to a ohm input or ice ersa. It is becoming less popular because it is prone to picking up interference, because it can't have any sharp bends along its route and because it has a shorter Far more efficient is the ohm coaxial cable called , R59U, or 59U. (You don't have to worry about the differences—they're all similar.) This has a solid center conducting wire, a surrounding insulator, a braided grounding shield wire and an outer insulation. Because the shield surrounds the center conductor, any interfering signal is sent to ground and can't reach (and interfere with) the wanted signal. Quality cable will have a more dense shield, approaching . It is used for cable and satellite television, and can be used with a standard television antenna with a transformer (see Step ). It should be noted that you will be using either the ohm input or the ohm input (or output), but not both. The only time this is different is when the incoming UHF is spUt and separated from the VHP, and the only time this occurs is with some "rabbit ears" antennas. In most cases, even then you'll get both VHP and UHP on the VHP wires. The cable used to carry the separated audio and ideo signals is similar to except that the center conductor is stranded rather than solid. Once again the center conductor is surrounded by an insulator, then the braided ground shield and an outer insulator. This cable is sometimes called "audio cable," and is usually smaller than cable. s important to now that although the cables appear to be similar, they are not interchangable. Step . Understanding RF transformers. When you want to get the advantages of using coaxial cable to connect a ohm television antenna to the ohm input on the VCR, or the ohm output of the VCR to the ohm input of a television set, you have to use a transformer. Although these transformers might look different, there are only two general types. Internally they are all the same. The real difference is in the inds of external connectors used. In all cases their ob is to transform (change) the impedance of the signal. A standard television antenna will have screwhead type connectors for the spade lugs used with ohm twin lead. A transformer will have spade lugs to fit under these screws and a threaded connector on the other side to accept the F- type connector of This same transformer can be used to connect a ohm source ( g., the VCR) to a ohm input (such as a television set that has only this). In this case, ohm coaxial cable is routed to the television set and is connected to the threaded side. The two spade lugs on the other side of the transformer connects to the television set. Used this way the transformer becomes a to . Another ind of transformer is used when the wire is already ohm but the VCR accepts only ohm. This transformer has two screw heads for the spade lugs of the wire and a push-on type connector on the other side. Some television sets have a built-in transformer, with an external switch (near the antenna input) that can be set to accept either ohm or ohm inputs. If your set has one, the ind of input and the switch If you intend to connect your VCR to another VCR (for dubbing, which is to copy the ideo cassette in one machine to a cassette in the other) or to connect our VCR to a home stereo system, you will need a cable or cables with RCA-type connectors. These are rarely included with the VCR. One cable will be needed for each signal you wish to use. Only one is needed if your goal is to connect a single audio output to a stereo. Two are needed if the VCR is capable of stereo, and two are needed for dubbing (because you are using audio and The way to connect is simply to plug the cable into the needed output needed input of the other device. For example, to dub you would connect the Video Out of the first VCR to the Video In of the second VCR; and the Audio Out of the first to the Audio In of Step . Using the adapter. If your VCR is monaural and has only one audio output, you can still play the sound through your home stereo. By using a adaptor you can simulate stereo. It won't be "real" stereo but will be able to use the usually better speakers of the stereo system. The adaptor has a single input and two outputs. The single audio output of the VCR is connected to the single input of the adaptor. The adaptor splits the signal into two parts. One of the connectors is plugged into the left channel input of the stereo amplifier and the other is plugged into the right channel input. Using signal splitters. To divide a signal coming in from one source, you can use a signal splitter. Signal splitters take one source and divide it into two or more outputs. You can use a signal splitter if you want to split an incoming cable signal to two VCRs. Buy a signal splitter at your local electronics store. Run the cables to each of the two VCRs. Amplifying the signal. If the signal is weak, or is split in too many directions, it might need to be amplified. A distribution amplifier does this. Connect the cable with the incoming signal to the input of the distribution amplifier. Connect the outputs to each of the units being driven, for instance tv ^o VCR and two television sets. You might also need a distribution amplifier if the unit being driven is a great distance away from the signal. Always put the amplifier near the source rather than the Step . Using an B switch. If ou want to witch one signal to t^ o different outputs, ou can use an B switch. The B switch is designed to work with the higher RF frequencies used in -ideo and television. These switches allow ou to switch between two sources. The s^ itch can control t^ o inputs and one output, or one input to two outputs. Switches that allow three or more outputs are also available. You would use an B switch if "ou wanted to switch betw^een cable and satellite signals. The two inputs are connected to the two inputs oi the B switch. The output is connected to the device being driven ( g., television or 'CR). Step . Designing your system. Now that you are aware of a few of the connectors, spUtters, and ampUfiers that are available, you can design the system you want. The easiest way to do this is to begin by drawing boxes to represent the different inputs and outputs of your system. This example shows two inputs (local antenna and cable service), and one VCR feeding two televisions. Notice the arrows that illustrate what the arious parts do and the directions of the signals. Step . Splitting the output signals. Each of the two sources will be supplying a signal to the VCR and both televisions. This means that the single output of the antenna and cable will need to be split to provide three outputs. Likewise, the VCR is to provide two outputs—one to each television. Step . Switching the input signals. The VCR needs two inputs—one from the antenna and one from the cable. Because you want to take your choice of either the antenna or the cable service, you need to switch between the two. An B switch is used for this. Each of the televisions will now be receiving three signals (antenna, cable and VCR), and again switching is needed. This time you'll need an C switch (since there are three choices). Step . Completing the design. The only thing left is to label what comes from where, and what goes where. You can draw in the actual lines if you wish, but this isn't necessary. For the actual installation, it might help if the arious cables are given labels (such as with a piece of tape). Once again, eep in mind that this is merely an example. The same technique can be used to design ust about any system, regardless of it is. My own system has antenna and satellite TV inputs, with the VCR outputting to two televisions and to the home stereo system. Within that system all the components are also interconnected so that I can record or play the audio from the VCR, from the radio, from records or from the CD player. By flicking a switch 1 can do two or three things at the same time. (For 1 can be recording a television program while watching a different channel, while the tape recorder is recording a radio program so I can listen to it later, while (if I wish) I listen to a new CD. It sounds complicated, but the design was derived by the same techniques detailed above. of the tests in this book require a olt-ohmmeter ( , also called a multimeter). A is a handy and ersatile piece of testing equipment, and s easy to use. With a , you can test any batteries you use—including the one in your car. You also can test the wall outlets to see if they have power and if they have been wired correctly (and to make sure they are safe). You can test wires, cables, and connectors to see if they need to be The you buy doesn't have to be fancy or expensive. A model costing between and should suffice. Extreme accuracy isn't usually needed. When checking a wall outlet for power, you rarely need accuracy of greater than about percent. Even the least expensive units are more accurate than that. A tests for ac oltage, dc oltage, and resistance. A number of ranges are available on the for each test. The most common ac test checks the wall outlets in your home; your meter should have a setting for the - olt ac range. Common dc tests involve in or near typical battery outputs—namely , 3, , 9, and . Make sure your oltage setting is higher than the oltage you are testing, so you don't damage the . For example, if you are expecting to read - olts ac, you would set the meter to the setting. If you are uncertain of the alue, start at the highest setting and work downwards. r d cator or) base of Step . Setting up the meter. For almost every test, plug the shorter end of the black lead into the "common" (-) ack on the meter. The shorter end of the red lead gets plugged into the + ack, which is often labeled as shown. Step . Setting the Ohms Adjust to zero. To set the "Ohms Adjust," turn on the meter, set the dial to read resistance (any range), touch the two probes together, and turn the adjusting wheel until the reading is exactly zero. Step . Setting the Zero Adjust. If your meter has a "Zero Adjust," turn on the meter and adjust the control nob so that the meter reads exactly zero. Step . Reading dc olts. To read dc olts (dc V or sometimes Vdc), set the meter to the proper range. Touch the black probe to the side with the negative (- or GND) label, and touch the red probe to the side with the positive (+) label. Step . Testing a battery. To test a battery, the positive terminal is usually round and is often labeled. Set the meter to read dc in the appropriate range. (AAA, AA, C, and D are all olts. On most other batteries, the oltage is clearly labeled.) Step . Testing for ac oltage. When testing for ac oltage, the orientation of the probes is not important because the ac oltage is constantly changing from negative to positive and from positive to negative. Because ac is generally much more dangerous to you, it is essential that you hold the probes only by the insulated handles. Step . Testing for continuity. In this book, the most important resistance (ohms) test is for continuity, which simply means that the conductor being tested is continuous (not broken). Although the setting used is not important, s best to use the highest setting (for resistance or ohms) on the dial. Step . Checking for continuity. Disconnect the wire or cable that is to be tested. Touch the probes to each end of the same conductor. It doesn't matter which probe touches which end. If the conductor is good, the needle should swing all the way to the right, giving a reading of zero ohms (or close to it). If there is a break in the wire, the reading will be close to infinity (full left scale and no needle movement). Step . Testing for a short. To test for a short in a cable, touch one probe to the center conductor and the other to the outer ground. (Repeat this test using the center conductor at one end and the outer ground at the other.) If the cable is good, the reading should be infinity (full left scale and no needle movement). If the meter gives any reading (any needle movement), the two conductors are touching. If the meter swings all the way to zero ohms, the conductors are in direct contact, which is a short circuit; the cable is bad. Testing for dc on a circuit board. When testing for dc on a circuit board, look for the label or GND. Touch the black probe to it and the red probe to the other dc point being tested. This will often be labeled something like +5 or + . Alternating current, such as the power from a household electrical outlet. The alue is constantly changing in a sine wave. antenna A device used to collect signals sent across the air from a television or radio transmitter. The opening of a lens; in ideo, this is more often called an iris, like the iris of the human eye. Of or relating to sound. The audio portion of a ideo tape is recorded at the top of the tape if monaural. If stereo, it is recorded both at the top and in stripes along with the ideo portion. Audio isual or audio ideo. This is the combined signals of both the audio and isual portions, To create the "striped" recording on the tape, the ideo head assembly is tilted at an angle. This angle is its azimuth. battery An electrochemical device that generates electricity through a chemical reaction. A standard "cell" generates approximately VA olts dc, and a battery might consist of one or more cells. For example, a 9- olt battery has six cells inside it; a - olt battery has Video recording playback system, invented by Sony. The cassette is physically smaller than a VHS cassette (but larger than a VHS-C, which is the "portable" ersion of VHS). cable A combination of two or more conductors in a single casing. capstan A ertical rotating shaft that drives tape at a constant speed. In a VCR the capstans are usually made of metal and often use a The plastic package containing tape. Charge coupled device. The most common type of ideo pickup in home ideo cameras and camcorders. It has all but replaced the older tube-type pickups. character generator A device that generates letters, numbers, and other symbols. More sophisticated units can be set to change the styling and size of the characters. Light has a ariety of colors that your eye does not see. The light from an incandescent bulb, such as a standard household lamp, is more red than open sunlight; shade is more blue. A camera detects these differences and must be adjusted for them. This is done with the "white balance" control on the ideo camera. (See white balance.) This is the balance or ratio between the brightest and darkest areas of a field. With "low contrast," the difference in tones is small; in "high contrast" the difference is large. Another term used to describe the sync track or cue track. The information recorded here controls the VCR and the Direct current, such as that in a batterv. distribution amplifier A device that amplifies a signal and then distributes it to a number of other devices. For example, if you wish to use one VCR to supply a signal to five or six television sets, the signal might not be strong enough to drive them all. In such a case, a distribution amplifier is needed. The camera and deck can be connected, Loss of signal, usually caused by the magnetic coating of the tape flaking off, resulting in "sparkly" white specks on the To copy. Dubbing involves connecting one VCR to another, with one playing the tape and the other recording it as it plays. The original recording is called first generation, the first copy called second generation, ^ dub of this is third generation. Dubbing results in a decrease in quality from one generation to the next. Dubbing copyrighted tapes is illegal. To modify in some way. In ideo this usually means removing unwanted scenes and uggling the order of scenes while making a dub. One of the easiest is " camera editing," which simply involves when you start and stop the camcorder The electromagnet that erases the recorded signal on the tape so that a new signal can be recorded. In the VCR it usually comes before the ideo head assembly. (See also flying erase head.) The connector often used in home ideo equipment to carry composite signals. The center conductor of the cable becomes the prong that slides into the small hole of the connector on the VCR or television. The cable used with it is usually . The apparent bending of the image at the top of the television screen. The most common cause is a worn or damaged flying erase head An erase head mounted on the ideo head assembly, rather than separate from it. With the erase head being physically closer to the recording head, there are no glitches. ghost A reflected or doubled image caused by two or more signals received simultaneously. Generally a recording error. A common glitch comes about when recording over an existing recording. Because of the distance between the erase head and the recording head, the tape is holding two different signals for a few seconds (until the erased tape gets to the recording heads). The result is a rainbowing effect, caused by the signals' interference. Any of the the electromagnets that record or playback. These include erase, ideo, and audio. The ideo head assembly is tilted causing a spiral- like movement of the play-record heads. The recording is then placed on the tape in diagonal "stripes." High quality. One or more special circuits used in many VCRs to increase the image quality. The opening (aperture) of the lens. Platform that holds the tape flat during loading. The metric measurement of light quantity. It is the amount of light reflected from a surface of one square meter by a standard candle one meter away. It is approximately equal to II foot-candles. macro A lens feature that allows the lens to be focused while ^ery The television set. In more technical circles, a monitor is a special ind of television that exhibits a better image than does the usual home television set. nickel-cadmium. A type of rechargable battery. The unit of resistance to the flow of electrical current. The result when oxygen combines chemically with another element. In recording, arious oxides are often used as the magnetic particles on the tape. Also called an RCA-type plug. Characterized by a fairly large center prong and "wings" around the outside, this plug is often used to carry the separate audio and ideo signals from one VCR to another for dubbing. Another common use is for carrying the audio signals of a stereo system. The device inside the ideo camera that converts the light into electricity, which in turn is used to create the recording. Picture element; tiny spots that make up the overall picture. Radio frequency; the band of frequencies used for radio and roller A "wheel" usually made of rubber (sometimes plastic) and used in the tape path to eep the tape moving correctly. Super-VHS; a relatively new system designed to increase the quality of the recording and playback over standard VHS. Signal- noise ratio. All recordings, amplifiers, etc. have some unwanted signals inherent. The more noise there is compared to the wanted signal, the poorer quality you'll get. Short for synchronization; eeping all the signals of the VCR and television "in step." The pulses that control this are recorded on the sync track of the tape, which is a linear recording at the bottom of Adjustment of the ideo head assembly that "times" the movement of the playback recording heads across the tape. Ultrahigh frequericy; a band of frequencies above VHF making up the television channels and above. Video cassette recorder; a VCR is alw^ays a VTR (see VTR), but a VTR isn't necessarily a VCR. The band of television frequencies making up channels 2 through . There is no channel 1. Recording playback system invented by JVC. VHS-C uses the same formatting with a smaller cassette. Volt-ohmmeter, also called a multimeter because it can measure oltage, resistance (measured in ohms) and often current Video tape recorder. See also VCR. The control on a ideo camera that allows the operator to adjust it for the ind and color of the ambient light. (See also zoom A lens feature that allows the user to get a closer picture of the subject without moving physically. A ratio allows you to ideograph a subject at feet as though it was only feet away. audio and erase heads, audio signal, recording of, audio ideo inputs acks, basic troubleshooting guide, bottom cover, removal, - cable connectors, cleaning, cables and connectors, , ejecting and reinserting, circuit board connectors, circuit breaker, checking, audio and erase heads, circuit board connectors, connecting strip, cleaning, input output terminals, controls and connectors, - audio ideo inputs acks, front panel connections, front panel controls, output channel selector, controls, front panel, erase heads, cleaning, front panel connections, front panel controls, audio signal, recording of, playback electromagnet, removing, for cleaning, idlers, belts, other parts, - input output terminals, loading platform, cleaning, locking "paddle," tape, magnetic oxide coating, magnetic oxide coating, needle-nose pliers, 9 output channel selector, playback electromagnet, plugs and probes, holding, power supply, location, 3 rewind tape, manually, circuits, dangerous, 4 power supply, location, 3 avoiding contact with, 5 tape destruction, power off, new tape, discarding, leader, making repair at, loose tape, extracting, tools and materials, , needle-nose pliers, 9 cables and connectors, ejecting and reinserting, circuit breaker, checking, power testing, incoming, power testing, outgoing, tape destruction, power test tape, making of, ideo head assembly, 5, avoiding contact with, 5 . .eep your VCR running trouble-free with oney-saving All Thumbs guide no experience necessary! Includes quick-and-easy VCR programming tips! Did you now that nine out of ten VCR malfunctions can be prevented with regular cleaning and maintenance— simple techniques that you can perform with Gene Williams' helpful guidance? Even fall ictim to a mechanical or electrical failure, the problem is usually caused by something that you can correct yourself —safely and easily— with a few basic tools and this aluable All Thumbs With the All Thumbs Guide to VCRs, you CAN: Clean and lubricate VCR components Repair worn idlers and belts Salvage damaged ideocassettes Eliminate snowy or distorted pictures Gene B. Williams is the bestselling author of more than popular how-to books for the (See Guarantee page for^more details.)