Illustrated by Carl Bryant W. Clement Stone, Publisher s nice, of course, to have a handyman around the house, but never there when the steam steam or the toaster won’t is written for and dedicated to the housewife who needs a repair manual on ast array of small electrical appliances. Edited by the Staff of Vocational Horizons, Inc. rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or portions thereof in any form, except inquiries should be addressed Madison Avenue, New York, New York of America and published taneously in Canada by Prentice-Hall of Canada, Limited, Birch- mount Road, Scarborough, Ontario. Library of Congress Catalog Card I: Repair Problems and Their Solutions Iron does not slide smoothly over cloth Not enough steam comes from the iron Water and steam sputters out of steam ports during operation Iron does not spray water Iron does not shut off Toaster does not heat One side of bread does not toast Bread does not stay down Toaster does not pop up Bread toasts too light or too dark User gets an electric shock when metal shell of toaster is touched Heating element does not come on Fuse blows or circuit breaker trips when broiler is turned on Fuse blows or circuit breaker trips when broiler is plugged into wall outlet with switch in the “off” position Coffee has poor flavor Water boils but does not enter coffee basket in percolator-type is too weak or too strong for desired setting Lid falls off when user pours coffee Indicator lamp does not operate House lights dim or fuse blows when aporizer Vaporizer produces little or no steam Appliance does not heat Pan-fried food sticks and or burns at prescribed settings Waffles stick to grill No heat on one or both waffle grills Plug becomes excessively hot Heating element glows red, but not enough heat can be felt The heater does not heat Does not pick up lint from rug Broom has weak suction and burning odor Motor runs but one or both beaters do not turn Excessive noise during operation Motor stops and starts during operation Mixer runs too slow or too fast for speed setting Mixer runs at full speed regardless of speed setting Motor hums but blades do not turn Liquid leaks from bottom of ar Blades stall intermittently during operation with loud grinding noise Rattling noise during operation Fan will not start unless blades are turned by hand Fan will not oscillate Air turns cool after short period of operation Dryer blows cool air only Excessive noise during operation Cuts can intermittently Can opener does not operate Heating element glows red but spit does not turn Razor runs too slow (may pinch) II: General Repair Procedures Fuses and circuit breakers Terminals and wire connectors Mending heating elements Connecting heating elements Digitized by the Internet Archive Kahle Austin Foundation https: archive.org details allaboutrepairin00sque_0 Modern technology has surrounded the American household with assortment of electrical appliances. These are the tools that today’s men and women have grown to depend upon to help in performance of around-the- house chores. They have become expert in their use, but they too frequently lack instruction in what to do when any of these tools malfunctions. The individual’s patience and manual dexterity will aid in the effective the most frequently encountered how" needed to restore operation to and to prolong the useful substantial dollar savings. Equally important, this book will serve as a guide Line drawings are used abundantly throughout the book because they aids than photographs. The illustrations were chosen because they incorporate features most often found in popular brands. The repair procedures outlined in each problem solver are arranged in simple, short steps. Each problem solver should be read through completely establish continuity before beginning adjustment any appliance being worked on should be unplugged. Extreme care has encounter no danger of injury. All repairs are simple and easily made. Any complex repairs or those involving any possible risk clearly must be referred to the attention of a qualified repair technician. In many instances the author suggests tools and materials to accomplish the adjustment or repair of an appliance. A glossary is included to introduce and illustrate less familiar tools. Clothes Irons (Steam and Regular) Iron does not slide smoothly over cloth. Explanation: There are two conditions that most often cause an iron to snag and pull. One is caused by foreign material that has burned and hardened on the sole plate of the iron. is caused by small burrs (often difficult to that have been scratched out Tools and Materials Needed: a small block of wood or small empty plastic box a piece of fine grit sandpaper or emery cloth scouring cleanser powder (used for sinks, etc.) sanding block (wood or plastic box). block against the sole plate with a straight up and against the sole plate, and use only moderate pres- Continue to sand the sole plate until all burned-on scratches have been removed. Be sure not to overlook any nicks along the edges is properly completed when the sole plate takes on an even, dull appearance. 5. Form steel wool into a pad and place sanding block. (Figure 3) in an up and down motion sanding block and about inch in thickness. Place the pad on the sanding block. Sprinkle scouring cleanser on the damp pad and from the pad to form a thick paste. Polish the sole plate with the cleanser paste until it takes on a bright sheen. If you are working on a steam iron, remove any cleanser paste that may have accumulated steam ports of the sole plate with the end of a paper caution: To avoid damaging the sole plate of the iron, never allow sharp objects or hard, rough surfaces in contact with the sole plate. Always rest and Clothes Irons (Steam Only) Not enough steam comes from the iron. Explanation: Minerals the steam chamber and steam ports and can clog the Tools and Materials Needed: a paper clip or hairpin I 2 cup of white inegar with a paper clip or a hairpin bent into shape as ( Figure 1) Wiggle paper clip or hair- pin in the steam ports to loosen hardened mineral white inegar with 2 cup of water. with the inegar-water solution. Set the fabric indicator dial to the “steam” setting Iron may he used immediately Clothes Irons (Steam Only) Explanation: This condition is caused by an overheated iron. There are two reasons why an iron becomes overheated. The first may simply be an incorrect dial setting. The second may be caused when the thermostat, which automati- Tools and Materials Needed: a small screwdriver (sewing machine type) . Make certain fabric indicator dial to “steam’’ position. If water and steam continue to sputter from steam thermostat must be checked and adjusted. caution: Remove plug from electric outlet and allow to room temperature before proceeding. more widely used types of steam irons. Moreover, they are designed so that the thermostat adjustment screw appliance repair shop 3. To reach the thermostat adjustment screw for the metal saddle plate off by grasping and lilting both sides with the fingertips. A stubborn saddle plate may be removed by carefully prying one side up with the blade of a screwdriver. caution: When using a screwdriver, take care not to pry against the plastic portion of the iron handle cated directly below the saddle plate. thermostat adjustment screw. Insert screwdriver blade ustment screw slot and give the adjustment screw a quarter turn in a clockwise direction. Retest the steam operation of the iron. additional quarter turn clockwise. Repeat the If adjustment does not correct the therefore, be replaced. to a qualified appliance service shop. test, shut the iron off and allow thoroughly cooled, set the fabric dial to the lowest into wall receptacle. If iron heats up, adjustment if iron does not heat on lowest that the thermostat did not 8. To reach the thermostat adjustment screw for the type of iron shown in Figure 2, bend a paper clip in the center of the plastic cap is pushed clear through into the handle. 9. Grasp the front cap of the iron handle and caution: Retrieve the cap rivet, which will be found in a little well directly below its position in the handle. it aside carefully so that it may be reinstalled after the thermostat adjustment has been completed. with pliers and remove Lift off the washer and the thermostat control cam. . Locate the thermostat adjustment nut. Grasp the adjustment nut with fingers and give a half turn in a clockwise direction. Replace the thermostat control cam, washer, and alve nut. Tighten alve nut securely with ( Figure 6) Connect the steam control lever to the top of the alve shaft and slide the front cap into place. Install the cam rivet. Press rivet firmly into flat side of the pliers. thermostat adjustments wise turns at a time) until iron steams properly. is defective and should be replaced by a qualified appliance technician. For final test, allow iron to cool to room tempera- ture. Then set fabric dial to the lowest heat posi- receptacle. If iron heats up, adjustment is complete means that the thermostat did not respond to the therefore, defective and must Clothes Irons (Steam and Regular) is produced in an iron by the effect of an electric wire. Anything that prevents the electric current from reaching the heating element wire or from passing com- Most often, the flow of electricity is stopped either when is blown or when the wires in the iron line cord flexing, bending, and tugging that occurs during normal use. Tools and Materials Needed: asbestos- and cloth-covered line cord (can be pur- a small screwdriver (sewing machine type) power. Plug a lamp or other appliance nown be in good working order into the outlet used for it can be assumed that a fuse has blown preventing electric power from reaching the wall outlet, or that the wall receptacle Fuses and Circuit Breakers, for further information other appliances operates, it means that the prob- 2. Examine the line cord plug. Check the plug prongs for looseness. Test the condition wires going into the plug by tugging firmly on the plug against the line cord. (Figure 1) prongs wiggle freely or from the line cord when pulled, the plug should be dures, Plugs, for further information. is possible for wires to break anywhere along the length of the line cord, they are to break at points where sharp bending oc- use. These points are located where line cord enters the plug and again where line cord sleeve. When you are uncertain about break- age or whenever the line cord shows outward signs of wear, such as fraying, replace the entire line cord outlined in the steps that follow. 3. Remove the terminal cover plate screw by turning of the terminal cover plate and gently pry 5. Examine the line cord wires going to the terminal push-on connectors, simply grasp each connector side- side motion and remove them. caution: Use moderate pressure otherwise damaging the terminal If wires are attached with terminal screws, loosen 7. Remove the line cord wire ends. line cord wire ends under the screws have shaped connectors, the wire ends slip out from behind the terminal screws. line cord wires use circular eyelets (Figure 4) screws must be removed eompletelv in order to disconnect the line cord wires. it becomes necessary to remove them. Refer to II, General Repair Procedures, Terminal and W ire Connectors, for further information. line cord by prying the cord out of the recess in the handle. (Figure 4) Cut the line cord as close to the metal cord stop as possible with a pair of heavy poultry or sewing shears and remove the cord stop. (Figure 5) Slide the cord sleeve off the line cord. reinstalled on the new replacement line cord. Slip the terminal ends of the new line cord through . Widen the metal cord stop with a pair of line cord by squeezing Slide cord sleeve firmly against the cord stop. Place cord sleeve into recess in handle and connect wire ends to terminal posts. Position wires so that certain that terminal posts do not touch each other. Replace the terminal cover special note: To extend the life of a line cord, never line cord around the handle of an it loosely heside the iron. Clothes Irons (Steam and Spray Type) Iron does not spray water. Explanation: There are two methods most commonly used by manu- to produce the water spray action irons. One type operates hand lotion, perfume, and cleaners from bottles). The the pressure created by to produce the water spray action. The hand pump can be identified in two ways: button reaches the bottom of The small orifice in the spray nozzle that emits the is uncovered and isible. The pressure spray iron is identified by the continuous spray of water (and steam) It is further identified by a sliding cap that moves up and allows water to be sprayed from orifice when the spray button to cover and close the water spray orifice when the spray button The size of the water spray orifice in both spray systems small. Therefore, when to produce a water spray, the orifice must be checked for and cleared of any foreign particles that may have Tools and Materials Needed: of an inch long, removed from a clothes brush or a pair of eyebrow tweezers Locate and identify the water spray orifice. bristle at one end with tweezers and bristle end into orifice opening. Make certain that the thickness of the bristle is not larger than the orifice opening and that the bristle exert pressure upon any through orifice opening. 3. To clear capped orifice (used in pressure systems), depress the spray button. This to expose the orifice. (Figure 4) spray mechanism has a serious mechanical defect, and the iron should he taken to a qualified appliance the depressed position and insert the bristle end through the orifice. Retest spray operation of iron. has not been restored, qualified appliance service shop for further testing Clothes Irons (Steam and Regular) Iron does not shut off. to heat after the fabric indi- means either that the thermostat needs adjustment or that the electrical contact points of the thermostat are in a closed position. Jammed thermostat contact points present a more serious problem, and in addition to not shutting off, the iron will heat to extremely high often causing aluminum using the iron to avoid permanently damaging the sole plate, and have iron serviced by a qualified appliance thermostat (when no evidence of extreme overheating Tools and Materials Needed: a small screwdriver (sewing machine type) 1. Remove line cord plug from wall outlet and allow 1 and 2 represent two of the more common inds of irons. Moreover, they are de- signed so that only a minimum number of parts need Set the fabric indicator nob to the “off” position. 3. To reach the thermostat adjustment screw for the 1, gently pry the metal saddle plate off hy grasping and lifting both sides with fingertips. A stubborn saddle plate may be re- moved by carefully prying one side up with the flat blade of a screwdriver. thermostat adjustment screw. Insert screwdriver blade in a clockwise direction. Plug the line cord into the wall outlet. Make sure tion. Check to see whether or not iron heats up. If iron does not heat in has corrected the condition and no further adjust- is necessary. Replace the saddle plate. If iron continues to heat in the line cord from the wall outlet. When the iron has cooled to room temperature, give the thermo- stat adjustment screw an additional quarter turn If adjustments do not prevent the iron from heat- ing in the “off” position, the indication is stuck and will probably have performed by a qualified appliance technician. the thermostat adjustment nut iron shown in Figure 2, bend a paper clip as shown in Figure 4. Place the tip of the paper clip center of the plastic cap rivet located on the iron pushed clear through into the handle. . Grasp the front cap of the iron handle and pull lever from the top of the alve shaft and remove Retrieve the cap rivet, which will be found in a little well directly below its position in the handle. it aside carefully so that it may he reinstalled after the thermostat adjustment with pliers and remove the nut. Lift off the washer and the thermostat control cam. 6) Grasp the adjustment nut with fingers and give stubborn, grasp nut with pliers to turn Use moderate pressure only. Replace the thermostat control cam, washer, and alve nut. Tighten alve nut securely with Connect the steam control lever to the top of the rivet. Press rivet firmly into place If iron does not heat, If iron fails to respond to adjustments and con- tinues to heat in the ‘ off'' position, have iron checked by qualified appliance technician. Clothes Irons (Steam and Regular) Excessive iron temperature may be caused by an incor- rect setting of the fabric indicator nob or a malfunc- Tools and Materials Needed: (used for candymaking and deep frying) a small screwdriver (sewing machine type) correctly set for fabric to be pressed. fabrics contain a ariety fibers. Identifying these fibers and nowing the correct ironing temperature to use are important for their pro- tection. Always follow the fabric or garment manufac- turer’s washing and ironing recommendations. the composition of the fabric is unknown or whenever is doubt concerning the correct ironing tempera- control nob set to the lowest heat position. is correctly set for the fabric being ironed be checked to determine if the correct temperature is being maintained by the thermostat. position on the fabric heat for at least three minutes. caution: When testing steam irons, make certain wa- ter has been removed and iron 5. Dip the end of the liquid thermometer (about two inches) into clean cooking oil. Turn the iron upside down and place the thermometer on the sole plate. ) Hold thermometer steady so that good is made with the sole plate. The cooking oil will help to transfer the heat of the sole plate 6. The thermometer should slow to a stop at a tem- is not working properly and is allowing the iron to overheat. If the thermometer pointer goes F. mark when the iron it means that the iron thermostat iron immediately from the wall outlet to prevent ther damage to the sole plate of the otherwise defective thermostats should be replaced by qualified appliance repair technicians. thermometer pointer indicates excessive iron tempera- ture ust above the normal range ( - to adjust the thermostat store correct ironing temperatures. The procedures for used irons are given in the steps that follow. 7. Remove the iron plug from the wall 8. To reach the thermostat adjustment screw for the metal saddle plate off by grasping and lifting both sides with fingertips. A stubborn saddle plate may be removed by carefully prying one side up with the tip of a flatblade screwdriver. caution: The saddle plate rests upon a plastic portion If a screwdriver must be used, take care not to pry against the plastic handle. thermostat adjustment slot of the thermostat adjustment screw and give the screw a quarter turn Connect iron to wall outlet and measure the tem- perature of the sole plate again. Be sure to wait at least three minutes and check to see that the fabric The temperature of the iron should now be lower. If, however, the temperature has not been lowered enough, turn the adjustment screw again test, turn the iron off and allow cooled, place the fabric indicator nob in the low- est heat position. Plug the iron into wall receptacle. If iron does not heat, it means that the thermostat and must be replaced. . To reach the thermostat adjustment nut for the type shown in Figure 3 and place the tip of the paper down firmly until the rivet is pushed clear through . Grasp the front cap of the iron handle and pull forward. Disconnect the steam control lever from Retrieve the cap rivet, which will be found in a little well directly below its position in the handle. it aside carefully so that it may be reinstalled after the thermostat adjustment has been completed. (turn counter-clockwise) with pliers and remove it. Lift off the washer and the thermostat control cam. . Locate the thermostat adjustment nut. Grasp the adjustment nut with fingers and give a half turn in a clockwise direction. Tighten alve nut securely with pliers and measure temperature of iron again. Repeat the adjustment (a half turn at a time) if necessary until tempera- ture falls within the normal range ( °- ( F. ). lowest heat position. Plug iron into wall outlet. and therefore must be replaced. in the lowest position, the thermostat adjustment has been successfully completed. front clip cap into place. rivet. Press rivet into place firmly smoke arising from a toaster is in almost all cases caused etc.) coming in contact with or accumulating close to brought about by improper use and care of a toaster. Tools and Materials Needed: clear household ammonia to heat without bread. note: Automatic self-lowering ated without bread by momentarily pressing down on the bread carriage with the wooden dle of the small paintbrush. 2. As toaster heats, peer into bread the exact area of heating element from which the and allow the toaster to cool to room temperature. Carefully reexamine with flashlight the area where stuck to heating element wire. Insert paintbrush carefully through bread slot and gently brush the food particle off the heating ele- ment and down into the crumb tray. toaster upside down. Crumbs and other particles of food from the crumb tray adhere to the heating element and cause a repetition of the smoking condition. More important, food par- ticles coming in contact with the heating element wire (bright overheated spots on heating element wire) that can cause the heating ele- 6. Remove butter or margarine ten onto heating element or dripped of toaster by washing toaster areas with a paint- one hour) before attempting to use special note: To insure satisfactory service from your Brush the crumb tray clean regularly. B. Do not turn toaster upside down to remove crumbs. Avoid the practice of buttering bread before toast- Toaster does not heat. heat, the cause can usually be traced to a blown fuse, a tripped circuit breaker, or a defective line cord. Tools and Materials Needed: (asbestos or plastic, as required by spe- cific toaster; can be purchased completely assem- bled with plug and terminal connectors a small screwdriver (sewing machine type) 1. Make sure that the wall outlet has electric power. or other appliance nown If lamp or other appliance fails to operate, it can be assumed that a fuse has blown or that a circuit breaker has tripped “off,” preventing elec- tric power from reaching the wall the wall receptacle itself is defective. Refer to Sec- tion II, General Repair Procedures, Fuses and Cir- for further information about 2. Examine the line cord plug. Check the plug prongs for looseness. Test the condition of the wires going into the plug by tugging firmly on the plug against the line cord. (Figure 1) prongs wiggle freely or from the line cord when pulled, the plug should be replaced. See Section II, General Repair Pro- cedures, Plugs, for further information. anywhere along the length of the most apt to break at points where sharp bending oc- curs during use. These points are located where line cord enters the plug and again where the line cord line cord shows outward signs of wear, such as fraying, replace the entire in the steps that follow. line cord from the wall before working on toaster. 3. Examine toaster shell and plastic base where line cord enters toaster. Locate and remove only those screws that fasten the section (usually part of the the toaster. Separate this section from the toaster to insure correct routing of new replacement line cord wires. Follow the line cord wire ends to where they end (toaster terminals) and note the ind of terminal If wires are attached with push-on connectors, simply grasp each con- nector with the fingertips and pull upward with a slight side to side motion and remove them. If wires are attached with terminal screws, loosen the two screws with two counter-clockwise turns and remove the line cord wire ends. If the line cord wire ends under the screws have shaped connectors, the wire ends will slip out from behind the terminal screws when the If the line cord wires screws must be removed completely connect the line cord wires. to drop the terminal screws into the II, General Repair Procedures, Termi- nal and ire Connectors, for further information. Free the line cord by removing the line cord stop. is held by plastic feed-through type a pair of pliers. (Figure 3) Squeeze hard on plier handles and pull cord stop and cord wire out. Set for reuse with new replacement 8. Feed the wire ends of the new replacement Place the line cord stop at a distance from the line cord wire ends equal to its original position on the pliers and push cord stop into place. terminals (screw or push-on). Route the wire ends of the line cord as they were Reattach toaster section and secure that the line cord wires are not pinched between parts. One side of bread does not toast. Explanation: A two-slice toaster may contain arate heating element units (one for each bread side). When one or more of these element units the side of the bread that faces the defective heating element will not be toasted. The failure of one or more broken or burned-out heating element (nichrome) wire. Tools and Materials Needed: a lead pencil (sharpened) a pair of long-nose pliers electrical hardware store) Identify the defective heating element unit. (The heating element facing the untoasted side of the and allow the toaster to cool to room temperature. Gently probe along the element wire the exact location of the wire break. (Figure 1 the heating element wire may be seen between the parted wire ends. At times, however, the space between the parted element wires to be noticed and will therefore re- quire gentle probing (with the point of a pencil) fails to disclose the wire break, open remove the bread crumb tray and continue to ex- amine the element unit through the bottom of the note: When a break in the heating element wire can- if, when located, the space between the two parted wire ends is more than one-half inch, toaster should be taken service shop for further tests and repairs. wire ends are found to be close together, they may be is described in the steps that follow. bottom with crumb tray opened) toward each other so that they overlap or at least ends in order to prevent further damage to them. 6. Bend a wire connector until the cylindrical sleeve breaks off from the front position of the connector. Grip the connector sleeve with the tip of the long- slip the sleeve over both ends the heating element wire. Carefully adjust the sleeve so that between the aws of the pliers so that both wire ends are locked together securely. (Figure 5) long-nose pliers, grip the sleeve as far back in the plier aws (towards the hinge) 9. Prod the sleeve with a pencil to see that wire ends Test the toaster operation. Plug the line cord into bread), and check the repaired element. Element Inspect the mended sleeve connection. with the same degree of redness as does the wire of the heating element, the repair has been prop- at the sleeve connection connection glows brighter ( more white hot than rest of the element wire, that the sleeve connection has not been properly made (loose). The sleeve connector should there- fore be removed and the connection remade with a new connector sleeve. special note: With normal use, the heating element units of toasters will operate for many years without failure. In most instances a defective heating element damaging the heating element units follow the suggestions listed below. come in contact with the heating element wires. B. Do not remove particles of food to the heating element units with hard, sharp ob- the toaster has cooled. become stuck in the bread slots with a fork; a fork caution: Disconnect the line cord from the wall out- let before attempting toasted cannot be removed by nife into the food item and pry the item straight up. Make certain that the nife blade the bread slot. Never allow it to touch the heating ele- Automatic Pop-Up Toasters Bread does not stay down. is lowered and raised in a toaster by the bread mechanism. Through normal use, the latching mecha- nism may bend out of adjustment to lock the bread carriage position. W hile many in different toaster models, most Tools and Materials Needed: a pair of universal pliers a pair of long-nose pliers non-inflammable cleaning fluid (capable of dissolving grease) note: The latch down mechanism side of the toaster that contains the bread lever and toast control nobs. Access to the latch down mecha- nism may be achieved by disassembling base section and or a section of the metal toaster shell. Figures 1, 3, and 6 illustrate common arieties of con- of the entire toaster down mechanism and should, a qualified appliance repair shop for service. 2. To disassemble toaster shown in Figure secures the nob to the lever. (Figure note: As an aid to removing a stubborn nob, wedge flat tip of a screwdriver behind the nob and pry 3. Remove the small toast control lever and nob set pull the toast control lever and nob out. section and pull down hard until the locking tabs are freed from the locking tab slots. metal shell section away from the toaster. (Figure 6. Examine the operation of the latch down mecha- nism after the plastic base or end shell section has been removed. Operate the bread lever and note not make contact), examine lever, and bread rack for bent parts. Realign any it back into position with a lock, examine the electromagnetic latch release and the latch lock to see if they move freely on their pivots. (Figure 2A) oughly with a non-inflammable cleaning fluid ap- plied with a small artist’s brush. Work the movable latch lock and electromagnetic latch release back and forth to allow the cleaning fluid to penetrate latch down mechanism. If the latch lock and electromagnetic latch release flat, leaf-shaped spring between the lease has sufficient tension to position the electro- magnetic latch release to its locking position from the solenoid so as to engage the latch lock). If the leaf spring (Figure 2A) slightly with long-nose pliers. Reassemble toaster and test latch down action. To toaster, simply reverse outlined in steps 2, 3, 4, and 5. note: Make certain that the locking tabs of the metal shell section are completely seated slots to insure satisfactory alignment of . To disassemble toaster shown in Figure 3, remove the bread lever nob and by pulling them straight out. shell section mounting screw with a pair of pliers. . Grasp the plastic shell section and pull ward until the spring clasp top to the metal shell is released to free the shell . Examine the operation of the latch down mecha- nism. (Figure 5) Operate the bread lever and note the condition that prevents the latch from engag- ing or locking onto the latch lock. (Figure 5A) lock, check the position of the latch lock with re- spect to the latch. The latch lock should be struck by the latch when the bread carriage until correct striking action lip when the bread carriage it does not, check along the bread carriage and bread carriage guide rod for any ob- from being lowered fully. , and in reverse order. note: When reassembling the toaster, make sure that at the top of the plastic shell section engages the edge of the metal toaster shell. to the latch down mechanism the toaster illustrated in Figure 6, remove the toast control nob by pulling . Remove the two screws that fasten the front plate. Depress the door release bar to raise the door and door handle. Lift the front plate (escutcheon) out. . Examine the operation of the latching mechanism by closing the door. (Figures 7 and 7A) Check to If necessary, bend the door latch or door latch pin with a pair of pliers until the door latch strikes the door latch pin correctly. If the door latch engages the door latch pin cor- rectly but the door does not lock, check to see that is properly seated and that enough tension to operate the latch and latch lock. If either does not move freely upon pivot, clean the pivot. ( Figure 7A) Refer to step 9 for cleaning procedures. . Reassemble toaster and test the latch down opera- Automatic Pop-Up Toasters Toaster does not pop up. Explanation: This condition occurs in automatic toasters when some- thing goes wrong in either the latching or timer mecha- nisms. The latching mechanism is responsible for lock- ing the bread carriage down during toasting, and the timer mechanism automatically limits the “down” time by tripping (unlocking) the latch to release the bread carriage after a prescribed period of toasting time has elapsed. The types of defects that can be encountered in these mechanisms are numerous. Some are and require the services of a qualified appliance tech- relatively minor and may only a simple adjustment or repair. The steps outlined under “solution” below cover common defects that are Tools and Materials Needed: a pair of long-nose pliers an artist s paintbrush (non-inflammable grease solvent type) press the bread lever and latch the bread carriage its toasting position. pop up the bread carriage. If the bread carriage it indicates either that ) or that the latching mechanism not releasing the carriage properly. carriage can be lowered and raised manually but fails to pop up automatically, the problem 2. When the bread carriage fails to release properly with manual operation, check along the carriage support slots and make certain that the bread car- is not binding. The bread carriage may bind when burned particles of food have become lodged in the carriage support is bent out of alignment. note: Light the inside of the toaster with a flashlight. Clear burned food from carriage support slots with nitting needle and brush clean with paintbrush. Straighten bread carriage moves up and down freely in the carriage support slots by bending slightly with the long-nose pliers. If the bread carriage moves freely when operated manually but fails to pop up automatically during stamped on the top of the only a single slice of bread, these toasters require that the bread slice be placed rows for correct timer operation. Failure to do so will cause bread placed in the other slot to burn long be- note: Refer to Problem Solver for the procedure mechanism of three common types of toasters. After testing and servicing the latch down mecha- nism, retest the toaster for automatic pop-up dur- timer. The toaster should then be taken to a quali- fied appliance service shop Automatic Pop-Up Toasters Bread toasts too light or too dark. Explanation: This complaint can often lie traced to the type of bread used. Since different breads may contain different quan- tities of moisture and ingredients such as milk, butter, sugar, and so forth, each may require a different toast- ing time to achieve the same degree of toast color. however, the resulting toast color aries on the usual control setting when the same bread is used, the toaster timer probably needs adjustment. Tools and Materials Needed: a small screwdriver (sewing machine type) to see that the toast control nob has not been accidentally moved from the desired setting. special note: The toast control nob adjusts the tinier mechanism to lengthen or shorten the toasting period, for darker or lighter to calibrate the toast control it indicates the degree of toast color ac- curatelv. Some toaster models make this timer adjust- Most models, however, timer adjustment screw or cam inside the metal toaster stamped on the top of the shell. When only a single that the bread slice he placed in the slot indicated by for correct timer operation. will cause bread placed dark or burn long before . Toast two slices of bread and observe the degree of toasting. is lighter than medium, remove plug timer adjustment nob one Retest by toasting bread. Turn adjustment nob if necessary, until desired medium toast If toast color is darker than medium, turn the timer sary, until desired medium toast note: The toasters illustrated in Figures 2 and 4 are examples of common types that require removal of a section of their shells in order to reach the timer ad- 6. To gain access to the timer for the toaster shown in Figure 2, remove the bread lever nob and the 7. Remove the plastic section mounting screw with a pair of pliers. 8. Grasp the plastic shell section and pull ward until the spring clasp that fastens top to the metal shell is released to free the shell Locate the timer adjustment screw. light, turn the adjustment screw (a half turn at a time) in a clockwise direc- tion with a small screwdriver. too dark, turn the adjustment screw toast color between each half turn of adjustment by toasting bread with the bread control set in middle position (“medium note: When reassembling the toaster, make sure that at the top of the plastic shell section fully engages the edge of the metal toaster shell. trated in Figure 4, remove the toast control nob . Remove the two screws that fasten the front plate. Depress the door release bar to raise the door and Locate the timer adjustment cam for toaster. is too light for medium setting, in- sert the tip of a screwdriver into the cam slot in a counter-clockwise direction. too dark for medium setting, turn adjustment cam (a quarter turn at a time) in a clockwise direction. Retest toast color after each quarter turn until de- caution: Make certain bread of toaster marked “one slice.” This condition occurs when one of the toaster compo- nents or wires that carry the electric current makes con- tact with any of the internal metal parts. The condition presents a serious hazard to the user of the toaster. Fur- ther use of the toaster should he discontinued until the condition has been corrected. Tools and Materials Needed: a pair of long-nose pliers a foot extension cord it to cool to room temperature. Latch the bread carriage down in its toasting posi- Light the inside of the bread slots with a flashlight chrome) wires. Check to see that the wires do not at any point contact metal parts of the toaster such ) Inspection should be made through the slots and bottom opening with bread crumb tray opened or removed. is possible for unwanted contact to be made between current-carrying parts and other metal components almost anywhere within the toaster, con- tact occurs most often when a portion of heating ele- ment wire extends too far into the bread slot or when the bread guard wires have been bent into the heating adjust heating element wires guard wires with the tip of a nitting needle or a pair of long-nose pliers space between the heating element wires and other metal parts of the toaster. (Figure 2) that the condition has special note: A simple testing circuit can be arranged with any available table lamp and cord. This testing circuit will provide an effective indication of whether or not exists. The procedure for arranging and using the test is outlined in the steps that follow. 6. Separate the wires of the extension cord for about ten inches along the center of its length by slitting them apart with a sharp paring nife. Guide the paring nife carefully along the center insulation of the extension cord to avoid exposing 7. Cut through one side of the separate extension cord wires with the paring nife. 8. Remove about an inch of insulation from the cut around one prong of the toaster plug. Connect the other wire end to any point on the metal the toaster. Make certain wire end to toaster shell . Connect lamp plug with extension cord receptacle. wall outlet. (Figure 6) . Turn on lamp switch. Depress bread lever down If lamp does not light, the hazardous condition has been corrected. The toaster is now safe for use. If lamp lights, the condition still exists. Disconnect toaster for unwanted connection between heating element wires and other metal parts. Retest toaster test lamp circuit as before. toaster should not be used until properly repaired by a qualified appli- special note: The extension cord that has had a wire cut for the purpose of arranging the may be restored for use as an extension cord by splic- ing the cut wire ends together. See Section eral Repair Procedures, How to Install Solderless Wire Non-Automatic Broilers Heating element does not come on. Explanation: Many simply constructed broilers have no automatic features. Most do not have an “ off they heat up when the line cord is plugged into a wall outlet, and they shut off when the line cord search will usually disclose a broken wire or wire con- Tools and Materials Needed: a small screwdriver (sewing machine type) a pair of long-nose pliers a pair of universal pliers one sheet of fine sandpaper 1. Make sure that the wall outlet has electric power. or other appliance nown If lamp or other appliance fails to operate, it can be assumed that a fuse has blown, a circuit power from reaching the wall is defective. Refer to Section If the lamp or other appliance op- it means that the problem 2. Examine the broiler line cord. the female appliance plug for heat damage. tions of the plastic body are burned away and the place the female appliance plug. Refer to Section II, General Repair Procedures, Plugs, for detailed to a damaged female plug, plug and or frayed wire covering, replace the entire line cord. The line cord may he purchased completely assembled from an appliance repair shop. Inspect the terminal posts of the broiler. If they are dark purple or black in color and are pitted (metal eaten away), clean them by rubbing strips of sandpaper until becomes smooth and bright. caution: Do not remove too much of the surface metal with sandpaper. Reducing the thickness of the termi- nal posts may result in a loose fit with the female ap- pliance plug. This will cause further deterioration both the plug and terminal posts. Terminal posts that posts. Reach into broiler with pliers and turn the back nut (clockwise) until terminal post note: The back nut may have become stuck thread of the terminal post. Therefore, when you turn nal post with another pair of pliers to prevent turning together with the back nut. After the back nut has been tightened, tighten the front terminal nut to insure a good connection with the heating element wire. If wires are broken, reconnect them II, General Repair Proce- dures, Heating Element Wire. Fuse blows or circuit breaker trips when broiler Explanation: Fuses and circuit breakers are safety devices that auto- matically limit the amount of electric power a line may carry. A blown fuse or tripped circuit breaker (depend- ing on which is employed) is an indication that the de- mand for electric power on that particular electric line limit. This can happen when line or when an appliance comes defective and creates a “short circuit.” Tools and Materials Needed: a pair of long-nose pliers fiberglass tape (heat-proof) Disconnect the broiler from the wall outlet. 2. Do not remove the blown fuse or, if circuit breaker is used, do not reset Fuses and Circuit Breakers, for further information. if other appliances have gone “dead as a result of the blown fuse. If other appliances are user’s operating too many appliances on ( and many other heat-producing appliances) is ery near the maximum safe power delivery of an electrical wiring regulations usu- ally require that a separate electric" line leading single wall outlet be provided for use by an electrical larly, consult your electrician about adequate wiring. If investigation of other appliances eliminates the possibility of too many appliances on one broiler has produced a short circuit. note and caution: A short circuit an unwanted electrical connection broiler. When a short circuit to use the broiler until the unwanted connec- is located and removed. A careful the broiler wiring will often reveal the location of the the steps that follow. 5. Remove the side shell mounting screws with a pair of pliers or a screwdriver and broiler with the flat blade of a screwdriver. Lift and remove the side shell. is no connection being see that the terminal connectors are not touching Adjust wires and or terminal connec- caution: The terminal connectors of the heating ele- ment can withstand only slight bending. (Figure 2) to adjust the terminal connectors, use extreme care to avoid breakage. Inspect the wires leading to the heating element terminals and the “ off" switch for frayed insula- tion covering. Cover frayed sections of wires with fiberglass tape. Refer to Section Procedures, Terminals and Wire Connectors, more details on how to insulate wire. Check to see that wires were not pinched between is sometimes evidenced blackened burn marks at one or more points along the wire. Cover these points with fiberglass tape. If cause of short circuit cannot he established, broiler should he taken repair shop for further tests. mounting screws. Take care not to pinch the wires between the side shell and the broiler shell. Make certain that the heating element terminals do not Replace the blown fuse with a new one or reset the circuit breaker to “on” and operate the broiler. Fuse blows or circuit breaker trips when into wall outlet with switch in the "off" position. with the broiler switch in the ‘‘off points to a defective line cord. A close examination of the broiler line cord will probably disclose that the two wires that are normally insulated Iroiu each other have at some point contacted each other and caused a short Tools and Materials Needed: one heavy-duty male plug a foot length of asbestos- and cloth-covered line . Examine the line cord plug. If the plug shows signs if the wires going into have melted or fused together, the plug must be re- If the plug parts from the line cord, for information on how Defective wires in line cords can often be hid- line cord, replace the entire line cord. The procedure is outlined in the steps that follow. 2. Remove the two screws that fasten the side shell and set them carefully aside. Pry the bottom edge of the side shell with the tip of a screwdriver. Lift and remove the side shell. 4. Remove the wire nuts by unscrewing them 5. Twist apart the line cord wire ends from the wires to which they are connected. Free the line cord from the side shell by removing the line cord stop. The feed-through type cord stop is removed by gripping it with the tip of a pair of ( Figure 4) Squeeze hard on the handles of the pliers, and pull the cord stop and line cord wire out. Set the cord stop carefully aside for reuse with new replacement line cord. 7. Feed the wire ends of the new replacement cord through the opening the line cord stop at a distance from the line cord its original position on the old Clamp the cord stop firmly on the line cord with Remove about an inch of insulation from each line . Wrap the individual line cord wires with fiberglass replace the wire nuts. Refer to Section nectors, for more detailed information. Reattach the side shell and secure not pinched between sharp edges Coffee Makers (Electric) Coffee has poor flavor. Explanation: Coffee flavor may ary with different brands, and some are preferred because of their distinctive coffee, however, tastes bitter because the coffee maker has not been properly maintained. Good coffee maker maintenance should include cleaning that removes cof- water. These contaminants often accumulate readily removed by normal cleaning methods. Tools and Materials Needed: one cup of white inegar dishwashing detergent See Figure 1 for illustration showing typical coffee maker and its component parts. Rinse coffee maker, coffee basket, and pump tube Place coffee basket and pump tube in cooking pot. Add dishwashing detergent and is prevented from entering the work- ing parts of these units for as long as the seals remain intact. Since the possibility of water leaking into the sealed base is ever present and since there is no greater as additional insurance satisfactory service. 4. Using dishwasher detergent and water, scrub cof- oughly with dishcloth. which produce minute scratches in metal surfaces. dry completely before storing. special note: The foregoing cleaning and care care. The cleaning procedures to he described steps that follow are suggested as periodic treatments to remove any accumulation of deposits. 6. To remove mineral deposits, fill coffee maker with water. Place coffee basket and pump tube in cof- 7. To remove coffee residue, dissolve approximately in water. Allow solution as when making coffee. Coffee Makers (Electric) Water boils but does not enter coffee basket Explanation: The perking action in an electric coffee maker trolled by a floating disc-shaped alve located base of the pump tube. If the alve disc fails to close, its open position, there will be no perking action. Tools and Materials Needed: note: Make certain that the pump tube in the heater well before each use. anything that might prevent the pump tube from Inspect the base of the pump tube. or dented, replace the pump tube. This part can Make certain an exact replacement is used. If the base of the pump tube dented, proceed to check the pump alve. If free, the alve disc can If the alve disc does not clatter, poke down with the tip of a toothpick. ground coffee that may be amming the alve disc. round the alve disc until the alve moves freelv. special note: An accumulation of coffee residue can be removed and prevented by soaking the appliance in dishwashing detergent regularly and baking soda solution periodically. is too weak or too strong for desired Explanation: Many factors are involved in controlling the strength of coffee. The most important points sider are proportion of coffee and water used, tempera- ture of the water, and the length of perking time. Tools and Materials Needed: 1. Check the directions on the can of your brand of coffee for the correct coffee measurement. Use an accurate measuring utensil. Fill the coffee maker with water to the proper cup level for quantity of coffee used. note: Always use water at tap temperature ( - F. ). Never use hot water to start the coffee. Pre-heated water will cause the perking action thus producing weak coffee. of the above precautions have been still too weak, check disc located in the base of the pump tube. When the 4. Check the pump tube base to see that into the heater well. If the base of the pump tube is dented or distorted, replace the pump tube. This part may he purchased from appliance parts and matically controlled hy a thermostat. blends packaged under different brand labels may re- quire slightly different settings of the coffee strength control nob to suit individual tastes. or excessively strong cate that the thermostat is not functioning correctly. The steps that follow list the procedures for uncover- ing the thermostat and the working condition caution: Remove appliance plug from maker before 5. Remove the coffee strength control nob by pulling fastens the base section to the pot. Carefully take caution: The base section of completely immersible coffee makers should he disassembled hy appliance technician in order to guarantee waterproof the movable thermostat blade. the blade could prevent movement during operation. Move the wires aside. corrosion and or stuck condi- tion. Reassemble coffee maker and test. or improper cleaning techniques) will cause the thermostat and other working parts to corrode and malfunction. coffee maker should he taken to an authorized appli- ance service shop for repair. special note: To insure satisfactory service from your B. Do not allow water or coffee spills to run into the hase section of the pot. service technicians investigate the slightest evidence of coffee leakage into base tion as quickly as possible to avoid further damage. Coffee Makers (Electric) Lid falls off when user pours coffee. Explanation: The lid of most coffee makers is held firmly on top of the pot by a number of small bumps which protrude around the edge of the lid. Through normal use these bumps can become worn or flattened so that they no longer exert the correct pressure against the pot to hold the lid firmly in place. Tools and Materials Needed: a sardine can opener ( ey) 1. Remove the lid from the coffee maker. (Figure 1) 2. Take off the glass lid nob to avoid damaging counter-clockwise and lifting them out. is stuck or otherwise difficult to re- Place lid on wood block with lid bump contacting cavity and tap the top of can opener with hammer. mine how far bump has been extended. In most cases, lid bumps need he extended only lid and tap out remaining fit of lid after tapping each lid bump so as to pre- If lid is too tight, flatten bumps slightly by tapping them with wood block. Coffee Makers (Electric) Indicator lamp does not operate. In some coffee percolators, to indicate that percolation has stopped and the coffee located directly behind the lens. If the percolator works can be corrected by simply replacing the lamp. This is an inexpensive repair and can usually be completed at an appliance repair shop while you wait. However, for replacing the indicator lamp scribed below for those who decide to do Tools and Materials Needed: caution: Disconnect appliance ping from coffee maker. 1. Remove the coffee strength selector nob by pull- 2. Remove the screw (or screws) used to fasten the plastic base of the percolator to the pot and care- fully take off the base. (Figure Locate and identify the indicator lamp. note: Two basic types of lamps are presently incandescent lamps and neon lamps. The incandescent and are usually found in older percolator models. This is secured in the lamp socket in one of two ways. is screwed into the socket and screw-base lamp. The other is pushed into the socket second lamp in the socket. This model percolators. This lamp does not require a lamp percolator by two thin wire leads. If a screw-base incandescent lamp its socket by turning it counter-clockwise. Take the burned out lamp to the nearest appliance repair shop and ask for a replacement. identify the lamp to he replaced by numbers printed its base and other code marks. model number of the percolator to insure purchase of the correct replacement lamp. (Figure 1) Before replacing plastic base, make certain is correctly aligned behind red lens. The lamp socket bracket may be bent slightly 5. To remove bayonet lamp, hold wi th one hand to prevent it from being forced out of position. Grasp the lamp with the other hand, wise. The lamp can then be pulled straight out of install a replacement bayonet lamp, align the channels on the lamp socket. it will go, twist the lamp clock- the plastic base and secure it to the pot with screw lead wires of the lamp are securely connected to their terminals. (Figure 3) ote: Neon lamps do not as a rule burn the glass bulb actually breaks, failure of these lamps wire leads. These lamps are purchased and replaced as an entire assembly that can include lamp, insulating sleeves, terminals, and part called a resistor. To replace neon lamp assembly, screws or nuts by turning counter-clockwise about two full turns and remove the lamp lead terminals. This will release the lamp assembly. (Figure 4) behind the lens hy a small clamp. out of the clamp to release tighten securely. Place lamp under clamp. caution: Make certain that wire leads of clamp positioned away from other parts. Handle lamp wires carefully to prevent them from breaking. Do not bend them sharply or tug them too hard. Secure plastic base to pot with screw (screws) and replace coffee strength control nob. lights dim or fuse blows when aporizer should serve as a warning that more electric power being demanded than can he supplied by the electric line. This can happen when too many appliances connected to the same electric line or when the appli- is not working properly. A blown circuit breaker (when reliable evidence that the power demand has exceeded Tools and Materials Needed: instructional literature (supplied by manufacturer) in the same room or on the still dim or fuse blows again, follow procedure outlined below. 2. Read and carefully follow manufacturer’s instruc- tions on use of aporizer. note: Modern aporizers depend upon a saline for operation. When the propor- is too great, a aporizer will draw an excessive amount of electricity. This can cause lights to dim and or a fuse to blow. Spill out contents of aporizer and refill with fresh 4. Add correct amount of salt to water and spoon to dissolve all salt. minutes for steam apor to appear. caution: Do not add more to hasten or increase steam apor. Also do not add medication to the water. Most aporizers contain a special well near the steam spout for an ' medication. Explanation: The simpler of two causes of this problem filling and preparation of the aporizer. The second and through normal use and placement of two electrodes that produce the steam. Tools and Materials Needed: instructional literature (supplied by manufacturer) a small phillips screwdriver a medium size screwdriver (flatblade) (d) two emery boards (used for fingernails) 1. Read and carefully follow manufacturer’s instruc- tions on use of aporizer. upon a correct proportion of salt and water. When not is used, aporizers will not produce a suf- ficient quantity of steam. is wise, therefore, to make manufacturer's recommended is carefully measured. Spill out contents of aporizer and refill with fresh 3. Add correct amount of salt to water and spoon to make certain minutes for steam apor to appear. caution: Do not add more to hasten or increase It aporizer still does not produce enough to solution steps helow. Disconnect aporizer from wall outlet. 6. Remove aporizer steam chamber from the water ) Allow water to drain from steam 7. Remove the screws that fasten the steam chamber emery board until metal electrodes are thoroughly that separates the two electrodes. The metal electrodes must never touch each other. Cleaning of electrodes if examination of electrodes shows that large portions of the electrodes have been eaten In most aporizers, the electrodes with new ones can restore the operation of a aporizer condition. The procedure the electrodes is outlined in the steps that follow. . Remove the screws that fasten the terminal cover lift off the cover plate. (Figure 5) . Remove the terminal nuts (turn counter-clockwise) with a pair of pliers. threaded terminal screws. Remove the two washers . Grasp electrodes and remove them by pulling them Insert new replacement electrodes in the same po- sition as original ones. Make certain the two neo- prene seals (Figure 6) are in place and are seated correctly to prevent water and steam from entering worn seals should be replaced. These may be pur- chased at an authorized service center. position and replace washers. terminal nuts down and tighten them with pliers. Make sure that terminal connectors do not touch Replace terminal cover plate and steam chamber cover to complete the repair. Electric Fry Pans and Cookers Electric Fry Pans and Cookers Appliance does not heat. Explanation: Modern fry pans and cookers are constructed (or pot), which contains the heating ele- this type of appliance does not heat, the cause malfunctioning section has been identified, the repair is best completed by replacing the entire section. Tools and Materials Needed: a table lamp (with watt bulb or less) a handful of fine steel wool (or abrasive cleaning pad) Disconnect control unit from the pan (or pot) and examine the terminal pins for signs of discoloration or corrosion. (Figure 1 If terminal pins are found to be discolored or cor- roded, clean them with ceed to the test outlined on the following pages. Electric Fry Pans and Cookers special note: A simple testing circuit can be arranged with any available table lamp and a foot extension cord. This testing circuit will provide an effective sual indication that can be used to determine which of The procedure for arranging and using the test circuit is outlined in the following steps. Separate the wires of the extension cord for about ten inches along the center of its length by slitting them with a sharp paring nife. (Figure 2) Guide the paring nife carefully along the insulated cen- ter of the extension cord in order to avoid exposing cord wires with the paring nife. 5. Remove about an inch of insulation from the cut Electric Fry Pans and Cookers around each terminal pin on the pan. 7. Screw a small wattage hull) ( watts or less) the lamp. Connect the lamp plug into the extension cord receptacle. Connect the extension cord plug into a convenient wall outlet. (Figure 5) 8. Turn the lamp switch on. it means that the heating element in the pan note: The heating element is usually embedded in the or pot and cannot he removed. Replacement, therefore, will require the purchase of a new pan or pot. This section can he purchased at any appliance repair shop. it means that the heating is working and that the malfunction note: Because of the exacting tolerances within which the control unit must operate, service and repairs this unit should he performed only by a qualified ap- Electric Fry Pans and Cookers Electric Deep Fryers; Fry Pans (Not Teflon Coated) Explanation: This complaint usually indicates that the surface tem- is too high. This can occur when the thermostat located in the control unit of the appliance defective. However, since other factors may of the thermostat should be tested before sarily condemned and replaced. Tools and Materials Needed: (used for candymaking and deep frying) thermostat will be described in the steps that follow. The first method can be used on deep fryers that have an indicating lamp. The second method can be em- ployed with those that do not have an indicating lamp. Pour about two inches of water into the pot. 2. Turn the temperature control nob F.) and allow the water to come to minutes. Then turn control nob slowly back cator light goes out. Stop turning the nob when goes out and read the temperature that the nob points to on the dial. Electric Fry Pans and Cookers If the nob points to a temperature between F., you can assume that the thermostat if the nob points to a temperature that not between the range given above, the thermostat control unit is defective and must be repaired or replaced. The appliance should be taken to an appliance repair shop for further test- and or cookers that do not have an indicator lamp, least two inches of clear cooking pan or pot and set the temperature control nob to 7. Connect line cord plug into wall outlet and allow oil to heat for at least six minutes. dial thermometer (used for candymaking temperature. (Figure 3) If the thermometer reading it means that the thermostat control unit is functioning properly. If the thermometer reading is defective and should be taken to an appliance repair shop for service. special note: Cooking oil, shortening, and butter be- have differently when used for frying. Some of these products contain a large quantity of food produce smoke at high frying temperatures. This con- is often mistakenlv thought to he caused by de- fective operation of the pan or cooker. Selection of oil eliminate unnecessary smoke. Electric Fry Pans and Cookers Teflon Coated Electric Fry Pans and Cookers is the modern plastic material used to coat the inside surface of pots and pans for, the Teflon coating can the life of the pan or cooker. If abused, the coating can Tools and Materials Needed: manufacturer’s use and care literature Read and carefully follow manufacturer’s on the use and care of Teflon coated pans and cookers. special note: Preventive care is the only solution for first products employing were often coated too thinly to withstand even normal use. Special plastic utensils had to he used to protect products were cautioned by the manufacturer to avoid using metal utensils to stir cooking ingredients. Many utensils. This practice improvements and moderate care should insure the ef- Teflon coating without fear of damage. The following precautions 1. Avoid the use of sharp metal utensils 2. Avoid the use of abrasive cleaning pads. 3. Never allow an empty pan or pot to heat to high temperatures. This can scorch the Teflon coating it to discolor and deteriorate. Grills and Waffle Bakers Electric Sandwich Grill and Waffle Baker Waffles stick to grill. Explanation: Removing a waffle that has stuck to the. hot waffle Baker can he a nuisance and a hazard. The secret preparation and cleaning care Tools and Materials Needed: clear, light cooking oil (nonsmoking type) before attempting to handle carefully with scouring pad. grills thoroughly with warm gent) are removed. (Figure 2) Grills and Waffle Bakers grill under running water since is danger that some water may get into the area below the base and come into contact with electrical connections. Use a wet cloth or rag 5. Apply a nonsmoking cooking oil to the baking sur- 6. Wipe the surfaces of the grills with paper towels oil has been absorbed. Waffle baker is now ready for use. with finely pitted surfaces. The pitting acts much like ery small wells that can store small quantities of cook- ing oil evenly over the entire surfaces of the grills. Once the surfaces of the waffle baker can be used con- tinuously without further need for oiling the surfaces. use, the surfaces need only clean with dry towels and should not be cleaned with detergents or scouring pads. sary, as would be the case after a long period of stor- the cleaning and treatment 1 through 7 should be followed. Grills and Waffle Bakers Electric Sandwich Chill and Waffle Baker No heat on one or both waffle Explanation: Heating element wires are located behind both the top and bottom grills of waffle bakers. In some waffle baker models, the heating element wires of each grill operate therefore, a broken or burned-out ment wire in one grill would not prevent the other grill from heating. In other waffle baker models, the heating element wires operate together. either heating element wire would prevent both grills from heating. However, the solution to the heating problems that may be en- countered in either type is the same. The exact point at which the wires have broken or burned apart must be located and repaired. Tools and Materials Needed: a pair of long-nose pliers long roundhead brass screw 2. Remove both grills. (Figures 1 and 2) note: Whiffle grills are secured to the baker with either Grills and Waffle Bakers 3. Examine the heating element wires carefully until 4. Form each wire end (Figure 4) Each eyelet opening should only be large enough to allow a size screw to pass through the brass screw through both secure them by threading the brass nut onto the 6. Hold the nut with the long-nose pliers and tighten the screw securely with a screwdriver. (Figure 5) Inspect the heating element wire to make certain sulators. Also, make certain that the element wire does not contact the metal housing its route. Carefully bend the wire away from the metal housing whenever necessary. Replace the grills to complete the repair. note: Other solutions for the repair and replacement of heating element wire are given in Section eral Repair Procedures, Heating Element Wire. Space Heaters (All Types) Plug becomes excessively hot. Explanation: Space heaters require large quantities of electric power operate this appliance continuously throughout a night or day. Extra care, therefore, must he taken to insure its source of power. An overheated plug is an indication that a poor connection exists at the wall outlet. More- it represents a potential fire hazard and should he eliminated as quickly as possible. Tools and Materials Needed: a medium size screwdriver (flatblade) a sharp paring or pocket nife one two-prong male plug (heavy-duty, rubber appliance type) 1. Remove the line cord plug from the wall outlet. 2. Examine the plug. Check II, General Repair Procedures, complete replacement procedure. It the plug prongs are firmly attached and the plug body does not show signs of heat damage, check the fit of the plug in the wall outlet for looseness. note: Firm pressure should he required to insert and remove the plug from the wall outlet. the plug shows evidence both prongs of the plug slightly by inserting the layers of each prong. special note: A loose fit can be caused by either the plug or a worn-out wall outlet receptacle. Some appli- ances have been originally equipped with plugs hav- When new, the folded type prongs have the necessary thickness to insure good contact with the wall outlet receptacle. With use, however, the folded metal prongs fits loosely after the prongs have been spread, can be assumed that the wall outlet receptacle and should he replaced. note: Most local electrical codes state that house wir- stalled and repaired by licensed electricians. Space Heaters (Reflector Type) Heating element glows upon their ability to throw heat into a small space or section of a larger area that requires additional heat. The reflector space heater moves heat into a space by reflecting the heat produced by the heating element. This heater cannot operate reflector has become clouded with dust Tools and Materials Needed: commercial metal polish a flatblade screwdriver (medium size) Remove the plug from the wall outlet. 1 and 3 illustrate two typical 2. Remove the front guard. ( Figure I), grasp the front guard close to where the rail ends are removed from the holes. (Figure 3), remove two screws located in the lower corners of the guard. ( Figure 4) Tilt the top cover applied to a soft rag. Use a dry soft rag to remove all traces of the metal polish. caution: When cleaning the reflector of the ind of space heater shown in Figure 3, take care not to press against the heating element wires. The heater does not heat. Explanation: In space heaters, as in other heat-producing appliances, passing through the heating element wire. When is prevented either from reaching the through it, the space heater will fail to operate. The flow Tools and Materials Needed: a flatblade screwdriver (medium size) a pair of long-nose pliers a tube of graphite lubricant 1. Make certain that the wall outlet has electric power. or other appliance nown If the lamp or other appliance it can he assumed that a fuse has blown or that a circuit breaker has tripped enting electric power from reaching the wall out- let, or that the wall outlet itself and Circuit Breakers, for further instructions about If, however, the lamp or other ap- it means that the problem is in the space heater. 2. Examine the line cord plug. Check the plug prongs for looseness. Test the condition of the wires going into the plug by tugging firmly on the plug against the line cord. prongs wiggle freely or if the plug parts from this line cord when pulled upon, the plug should be dures, Plugs, for further information. special note: Many space heater models employ ( Figure 2 illustrates such a safety switch. ) Whenever the space heater the safety switch should be checked functioning properly. 3. Examine the operation of the safety switch. Place the heater on a table so that the switch to see that the contact points come ( close ) when the heater rests on the table ( open ) when the heater is lifted when the heater rests on its stand, check the switch 5. Operate the switch control shaft by pushing manually. The control shaft should move up freely and then return to its lower position automatically. If the switch control shaft does not move from a plastic dispenser. (Figure 3) shaft moves up and down that the switch control far enough to move the contact points together. 8. Check to see that the switch control shaft extends down to the table surface far enough to be lifted when the heater is resting on slightly by pressing down on both ends. 4) This should allow the shaft to protrude further past the heater stand for proper operation. If examination of the safety switch proves functioning properly but not operate, check the terminal connectors of the heater element wire and the element wire see that there are no loose connections or broken screws located at both lower corners of the heater. ( Figure 2) Lift up the top of the heater and lift out . Grasp each connector and wiggle looseness. Replace any connector that note: The type of heating element wire used factory as a complete unit. This type of heater element cannot be repaired practically. When broken (burned this heater element must be purchased and placed as an entire unit. The procedure for replacing in the steps that follow. . Grasp the lower retaining (horseshoe-shaped) clip with a pair of long-nose pliers and pull heater element mounting shaft. terminal connectors manually and pulling them off . Grasp the heating element unit by the mounting rod and lift the entire heater unit up and out of the bottom mounting bracket. Slide the heating unit of the top mounting bracket note: An exact replacement heating element unit may the new replacement heater element unit note: The space heater not employ a safety switch. When heater fails to operate, the heating element unit should be checked. The steps repairing, and or replacing the Disconnect the line cord plug from the wall outlet. heating element and unscrew it counter-clockwise) spect the heating element closely .9) Check to see that the terminal in a clockwise direc- tion with a screwdriver. If terminal screw connections appear to he good, carefully inspect the element wire along length on the cone-shaped ceramic form. (burned-out or broken), replace the entire heating note: This type of heating element available from any appliance repair shop. Vacuum Cleaner (Canister or Tank Type) is invariably the cause when a canister or tank type acuum cleaner does not pick up. Weak suc- comes restricted or completely clogged by excessive dirt in the dust bag or when an accumulation of hair, solid objects, etc., obstructs the hose. Tools and Materials Needed-. a clean dust bag (if needed) Check the dust bag. Replace it if filled. test pick- up action of cleaner. If suction hose for obstruction. Push broom handle through hose to clear obstruc- Attach hose to acuum cleaner air outlet fitting and CAUTION: Place free end of hose in a paper bag for step 3 to prevent dust from blowing out into room. Suction strength at hose end should be equal to suc- felt at acuum cleaner suction fitting. Suction strength may be tested by placing palm of hand over suction openings. Good suction strength will draw hand with considerable force. If the hose again becomes clogged with lint soon after it was properly cleared, either a portion of the inner hose liner has torn loose or the spring wire that forms the hose has broken and utting into the hose air passage, collecting hose so damaged should be replaced. (See Problem Vacuum Cleaner (Canister or Tank Type) A acuum cleaner hose can break in a number of ways. Two isible types of breaks become obvious when either the outer fabric (cloth or plastic) covering tears or the spring wire collapses at some point along the length of sharply reducing the hose diameter point. Not all hose breaks are obvious, however. A por- tion of the inner fabric liner can often tear, or the spring wire break, without collapse of the hose. Both of these conditions would not be easily noticed. All breaks in the hose, however, would greatly reduce the suction strength of the acuum cleaner and Tools and Materials Needed: a flatblade screwdriver (medium size) a pair of diagonal wire cutting pliers a small bottle of white (resin ty pe) glue from acuum cleaner service shop or general appli- Examine both ends of broken hose tvpe of hose end construction. NOTE: The metal pieces (fittings) at both ends of the hose are not to be considered part of the hose. Re- placement hoses are made available without these fittings. Fittings must therefore be removed and re- tached to the hose ends in either of two ways. The construction of the hose ends gives the clue as with heavy molded rubber covers. other type of construction, the hose ends insert di- rectly into the fittings. No rubber molding can be If hose is constructed with molded rubber ends, re- move metal fittings by prying molded end of hose size screwdriver. (Figure Then grasp the metal fitting with one hand and the hose end with the other and remove the fitting us- ing a twisting, pulling motion. NOTE: Take old hose to appliance shop when pur- chasing new hose, to match replacement hose. Attach fittings from defective hose onto new replace- ment hose. Use twisting, pushing motions to insert fittings into hose. (Figure 3) This will com- plete the replacement of this type of hose. If hose to be replaced does not have molded rubber ends (as shown in Figure 4), proceed as in the steps (fabric and spring wire) a point approximately two inches from each metal fitting. Use a pair of diagonal wire cutting pliers or a pair of heavy poultry shears. (Figure 5) Grasp cut end of spring wire with a pair of pliers Continue to pull until spring wire moved from metal fitting. (Figure 6) NOTE: Considerable force may be necessarv to tear spring wire free. If necessary, have an assistant hold metal fitting while spring wire is being pulled. Pull out as much of the remaining fabric as possible. Push metal collar of fitting forward (away from hose it will go to expose the metal fitting Scrape off any residue which may have stuck onto fitting end from old hose with the flatblade screw- the new replacement hose with white glue and al- low to dry for about ten minutes. NOTE: The fabric ends of this type of replacement hose can easily become frayed during normal han- dling. The thin coating of glue will prevent fraying and help facilitate its installation. Coat the fitting end liberally with white glue, and push the hose end over it as far as pull the fitting collar over the hose end to complete Repeat the procedure to install the cleaner attach- ment fitting to opposite hose end. CAUTION: Allow at least two hours for glue to dry before using the cleaner. SPECIAL NOTE: To help prolong the life of a acuum Vacuum Cleaner (Canister or Tank Type) acuum cleaner and collected in the dust bag. Some of the finer particles of dust, however, do manage to get through the dust bag. Once past the dust bag, they would be drawn into the acuum cleaner motor to clog eventually cause its failure. Motor filters are the cloth or fibrous screens located between the dust bag and the period of time, these filters can accumulate enough dust to restrict the passage of acuum air through the cleaner and cause weak suction. They must, therefore, be period- ically cleaned or replaced depending upon their condi- Tools and Materials Needed: a flatblade screwdriver (medium size) a phillips screwdriver (medium size) a replacement filter (purchased from acuum clean- er or general appliance repair shop) Figures 1, 4, and 9 illustrate three of the more com- mon types of tank and canister acuum cleaners in use. Identify your acuum cleaner with one of NOTE: Before proceeding to check the over-filled dust bag or defective hose as described in Problem Solvers and . Figure 1, disconnect the cleaner from electric out- lid and remove dust bag. NOTE: Older model tank type cleaners are equipped fibers of this ind of bag eventually become im- pregnated with dust so is excessively impeded. The bags should, therefore, be periodically washed with soap (deter- gent) and water, then rinsed and allowed filter directly behind the dust provided) and pull it out. filter pad may be found housed its frame and set frame aside to be used wdth Install new replacement filter. filter material most often used in older felt. Do not attempt to clean this ind of filter, since embedded dust is difficult to felt type material (or size) can- not be purchased, cut a circular piece of filtering filter, which can be purchased service shops. Use the original filter as a template to cut new filter to exact size for acuum cleaner. Install clean dust bag and replace front suction lid to complete work on this type of cleaner. releasing the two clasps. Remove top handle piece (twist counter-clockwise) and place the top section of cleaner upside down on table. (Figures 5 and 6) NOTE: The motor filter for this particular cleaner the cloth fabric which completely covers the motor. of this section of the cleaner is used to prevent any dust which may have gone through both the dust bag and motor filter from getting out into the room. filter will be discussed (not hot) water by hand (as you would any heavily soiled cloth). Allow to dry before replacing it. filter located in the bonnet of the top section. top section right-side up. Locate and remove four screws around the top air Lift off the bonnet from the top section. (Figure 8) the bonnet. (Figure 8) NOTE: This material (fiber batting) cannot be clean- ed successfully and, therefore, should be replaced. If original filter material cannot be purchased, use purchased from any major appliance service shop. Replace new air filter material in the bonnet. Place filter cover over the and fasten the bonnet to the top section of the clean- er with the four screws. section upside down again and filter cloth (when dry), to complete the work on this type of acuum cleaner. for the acuum cleaner illustrated in Figure 9, lift top section of cleaner to expose dust bag and motor-fan assembly. (Figure ) Locate disc-shaped motor filter on top of the motor- NOTE: The material used Remove the filter by forcing it over and off the cen- thickness, and diameter. ficiency, empty the dust bag frequently. Never op- erate cleaner without dust bag. Vacuum Cleaner (Upright Type) Docs not pick up lint from rug. The rug cleaning ability of an upright acuum cleaner depends a great deal upon the spinning action of the beater-brush assembly and the rubber belt which drives it. When this type of cleaner fails to remove lint, thread, etc., from rugs, the problem can usually be traced to one or both of these components. Tools and Materials Needed: a flatblade screwdriver (medium size) beater-brush assembly and its rubber drive belt. Lay the cleaner down on the floor horizontally. ( Figure 1) Connect the clean- It should rotate rapidly. satisfactorily, the rubber drive belt closer inspection of the beater brush made. If the beater brush does not rotate, or rotates CAUTION: Disconnect cleaner from brushes, scan the bottom opening of the acuum Rotate the beater brush slowly by hand so that each row of brush bristles moves seen above the bottom opening (about they are worn and must be replaced. NOTE: The procedure for replacing brush segments or the entire beater brush is described in steps 7 to resilient, the rubber has probably dried out and be- come brittle thus losing its gripping ability. along the entire length of the belt If rubber drive belt has become brittle or it will not rotate the beater-brush sembly properly and should, therefore, be replaced. plate. (See Figures 4 and 5 for location of different type cover plates.) Slip the belt off the motor shaft pulley. (Figures 4 and 5) NOTE: To complete the removal of the drive the beater brush assembly must be removed from To remove the beater brush, lift up the rug guard (if used) located across the bottom opening. Examine the ends of the beater brush assembly for NOTE: The methods used to secure the beater brush in its holder ary with the different manufacturers. In some model acuum cleaners, the ends of the beater brush are simply held in a tight fitting rub- each end of the beater brush to latch it. II beater-brush assembly employs latching pry the levers open with the flatblade of a screw- 7) Grasp the beater brush and pull If no latching levers are used, the beater brush removed by pulling it sharply out. Slip the drive belt off the beater brush to complete assembly have been removed and can now be placed. When purchasing a new drive belt, it would to have with you the make and model the acuum cleaner written on a slip of paper and, beater brush (now removed from the cleaner) can be brought as a complete unit to an authorized ap- pliance service shop to be either rebuilt or replaced It would, however, be more eco- nomical to service the beater-brush assembly your- at home. The steps that follow below outline the procedure to be used for restoring the beater- cumulate at the ends of the beater brush and pre- it from spinning freely. Use the point of a par- ing nife to loosen and cut hair and thread wound around beater-brush ends. If brushes are worn (determined by test in step 3), replace the individual brush segments. NOTE: Two methods are commonly used to attach to the beater-brush assembly. In one, each brush segment is held by two screw's, one at each end of the brush segment. In the other, the brush segments are fitted into grooved chan- in the beater-brush assembly. Procedures removing both types are given below. To remove brush segments that are attached with screws, remove both screws at each end of the brush ( Figure ) Pry brush segment out with the tip of a flatblade screwdriver. To remove the channel held type brush segments, first remove one of the end plates. This grasping both end plates and twisting them in op- posite directions until one plate comes off. Pry out the remaining end section with the tip of a flatblade screwdriver. Tap the end of the center shaft with the back of a hammer handle. (Figure ) Pull the center shaft out of the beater-brush assem- Push the brush segments out of their channels with the tip of a screwdriver. Replace new brush segments by reversing the above procedure. Take special note and care when replac- ing the center shaft to make sure that the locating ey on the center shaft lines up with the notch on the beater-brush drum. NOTE: Brush segments have their identifying part When purchasing new brush segments, make sure they are exact replacements. Broom has weak suction and burning odor. When this type of appliance gives off a burning odor, electric motor. The nature of the motor problem can be serious or minor. One of the most common and minor causes of motor problems (and resulting burning odor) brushes. They should, therefore, be carefully inspected and serviced before other motor components are con- Tools and Materials Needed: a flatblade screwdriver Disconnect the cleaner from electric outlet. side of the motor housing. special NOTE: Motor brushes (graphite) material. They are usually bar- electrical contact between tating parts of a motor. They are recessed motor housing and are retained with plastic CAUTION: Remove the motor brush cap slowly avoid the danger of the brush springs popping out the motor brush spring, which lift out both spring and brush. brush will appear as shown in Figure 5. It must have sufficient tension to return to its origi- nal length when released. and brush spring are a complete unit and are pur- chased as such. In other model cleaners, the motor brushes may be purchased separately from the brush spring. However, it is advisable that the brushes and brush springs be replaced whenever either or both springs may be purchased from any qualified appli- ance repair or parts supply store. Be sure along the old motor brush and spring to insure pur- chase of an exact matching set. If inspection of motor brushes and springs proves that they are in good order, they may be reinstalled in the motor, but only after proper cleaning and preparation. The procedure for cleaning and pre- paring the motor brushes is the same as the proced- brushes and is given in steps 9 through . in half and with a back-and- forth motion, wipe the inside of the recessed brush ( Figure 6) Do the same to the other brush holder using a fresh pipe cleaner. all four sides of each brush. Place a paper motor brush on one of its sides atop the paper towel. Hold the brush firmly and rub of the towel. Repeat strokes is removed. Clean the remaining three sides in the same manner. firmly against flat towel surface to maintain square corners on brush. Do not allow brush corner to be- come rounded. Do not remove brush material by fit too loosely in the recessed Test to see that each motor brush has free movement in its recessed holder. Hold the motor brush so that Insert the brush into Grasp the brush spring and move the brush in and out of the holder. Brushes should move freely with- If either or both brushes do not move freely repeat cleaning of recessed brush holder and brushes as in steps 9 and the replacement of brushes by placing (clockwise) on securely. Test the operation of the electric broom. NOTE: If electric broom continues to have weak suc- tion and burning odor after motor brushes have problem is indicated. Discontinue use of the cleaner a qualified appliance repair shop for further testing. Food Mixer (Portable Type) Motor runs but one or both beaters do not turn. Gears are used in food mixers to transfer the turning if the motor runs without turning the beaters, the cause can usually be traced Tools and Materials Needed: a flatblade screwdriver a phillips screwdriver a tube of lubri-plate (white grease) Examine mixer for screws that are used to hold the top and bottom halves of the case together. These are usually located on the bottom half of the mixer CAUTION: Disconnect the mixer from electric outlet. Remove (eject) the beaters. Remove the case screws with an appropriate screw - phillips type screwdriver pending upon the type of screw head used). (if switch nob prevents moval of top case section) by pulling it straight off. Lift the top half of the mixer case off and examine the plastic or fiber worm gears for broken or worn ( Figure 4) An example of a worm gear that illustrates an example of a worm gear with worn case. For these models, must be removed to gain access to them. straight up and out of the lowercase section. (Figure to replace both worm gears as a set (left worm gear and right worm gear) even they may be ordered directly from the manufactur- s parts supply division. Be sure to specify com- plete model or catalog number together with the apply a light coat of grease to the gear spindles with fingertip. (Figure 9) alignment indicating marks (if provided) face each must be aligned with the mark on the right worm to prevent the heaters from clashing. When the new replacement gears are not marked, relationship must be found through install unmarked worm gears, insert the gears fully into the spindle shafts, then attach the beaters. If beaters touch each other, position one of the it clockwise or counter-clockwise) until the beaters mesh without clashing. After worm gears have been installed, apply a small If mixer construction includes a gear the gear case over the worm shaft. Food Mixer (Portable Type) is normal for food mixers as well driven appliances to undergo a temperature rise during operation. The electric motor normally generates a cer- tain quantity of heat. Abnormal conditions, however, which prevent removal of motor heat or which cause the motor to generate an excessive amount of heat, can Tools and Materials Needed: Examine the air ent slots located in the mixer case to see that they have not become clogged with food (flour, egg, etc.) which may have splattered during NOTE: While the appearance of the for different makes and models aries, their function remains the same. A small fan driven by the mixer the mixer and discharges it through the ent slots at the other; thereby cooling the motor. If the ent overheating can result. cleaner in half and insert folded end into ent slots to remove food residue. (Figure 3) examine air flow through mixer after cleaning. operating the mixer. Air must be at one end (front or rear) of the mixer. special NOTE: Occasionallv, a mixer may overheat even though air circulation through could be caused when the mixer is subjected to ab- low speed for long periods during operation. Other, more serious conditions which can cause overheat- ing involve the electric motor itself. If overheating to a qualified appliance repair shop. Food Mixer (Portable Type) Excessive noise during operation. as any clicking, banging, is not part of the normal sound made by should be quickly investigated, as it usually means that some part has become loose or worn, and that one part is striking against another. Tools and Materials Needed: a phillips screwdriver a flatblade screwdriver (small size, sewing machine Operate mixer with beaters installed and notice If noise occurs only when beaters are used, beater tines are only slightly bent, they may be re- aligned by bending them back into shape with a pair of pliers. (Figure 2) Make slight test mixer between each adjustment until noise disappears. II beater tines are found to be badly distort- ed, as might happen when the mixer is accidentally the beater should be replaced with a new one. Re- placement beaters are available most local appliance repair shops. locally, they may be ordered directly from manu- facturer’s parts supply division. that can be heard even with the is caused by something within the mixer. It will be necessary to disassemble the mixer case to gain access into the mixer to determine the Remove the top half of the mixer case by removing the case screws with a phillips screwdriver. If speed control nob prevents removal of top half of mixer case, remove the nob by pulling it straight Check for proper clearance between motor fan and slowly by hand for at least one complete revolution. 5) Fan blades must not come with any other part, such as wires, case, etc. is striking a wire, bend wire away from fan. Make certain wire will not spring back to contact fan blades again. A small piece of plastic electrical to secure a loose wire ( Figure 6) Carefully reassemble the case to complete is striking a portion of the case (or it back into alignment with the 8) Carefully reassemble the case to complete the repair. NOTE: If inspection of fan blades discloses that they were not bent or otherwise distorted, a check must be made of the amount of free movement the fan blade and the motor shaft on which to end (called end play). play of the motor shaft is too much, the fan during screw that can be adjusted to eliminate excessive end play, shoidd it exist. for excessive end play, grasp the rear end of the mixer. motor shaft in either direction is sufficient to cause the fan to come into contact (no matter how slight) with other parts, the amount of end play sive and should be adjusted. NOTE: Correct motor shaft end play should allow the motor shaft to move only about . inches (or the approximate thickness of a match book cover). adjustment screw lock nut by turning one full turn Insert small flatblade screwdriver into slot of adjust- ) check amount of end play. Make additional (if needed) and check end play after each adjustment until correct adjustment When correct adjustment is obtained, hold adjust- ment screw in final position with small screwdriver and tighten adjustment lock nut (clockwise) to lock the adjustment screw in place. CAUTION: Make certain correct amount of end play remains after adjustment lock nut is tightened. Not enough end play will cause motor shaft to bind and could result in damage to the mixer motor. Reassemble the mixer case to complete the repair. Food Mixer (Portable and Stand Type) Motor stops and starts during operation. Intermittent operation is invariably caused by a loose or broken wire connection. Since the to constant bending and tugging normal use, a broken wire is more likely to occur there than anywhere else in the food mixer. Tools and Materials Needed: a flatblade screwdriver (small size) a pair of universal pliers pliers or itchen poultry shears 2 insulating wire nuts ( 2) Plug the mixer into an electric outlet and turn it on. line cord igorously while the mixer running. If the mixer motor stops and starts as the is being wiggled, the for broken wires or loose con- basic types of line cords are system which permanently wires the line cord into 1) The newer type fine cord detachable and connects to the mixer by means of a female plug. (Figure 2) that the two-prong male plug (used on both types of line cords) fits securely in the wall outlet, spread each plug prong with a screwdriver to provide better contact. (Figure 4) test operation of food mixer after adjusting the If line cord being tested the female plug should insure good electrical contact with the appliance. To adjust the female plug of the half the plug between the aws of a pair of universal pliers and squeeze the pliers firmly to tighten the If mixer continues to operate intermittently after male and female plug prongs have been ad- usted, the entire line cord should be replaced with a new one. No special procedure place detachable type line cords since these simply plug into the mixer. Detachable type line cords may shops. If not available locally, they may be ordered by mail from the manufacturer’s parts supply divi- sion. Re sure to specify model number and color of type line cords can be accomplished by following the procedure outlined in the steps below. CAUTION: Remove the line cord from the wall outlet. down on its side with bottom facing you. Locate and remove the terminal cover plate screw Remove the terminal cover plate by Cut both line cord wire ends ust below the plastic- cord out through hole to remove it. Carefully remove about of an inch of the insula- terminal wire ends with paring nife. (Figure 9) CAUTION: Take care not to cut or otherwise remove any of the copper wire strands when removing the Twist the loose wire strands together as shown in Connect the bare wire ends of the food mixer to the bare wire ends of the new line cord. Screw an insulating wire nut onto each wire con- Fasten the terminal cover plate in place to complete SPECIAL NOTE: To prolong line cords, never wrap the line cord tightly around the mixer body. When storing line cord loosely by the side of the mixer. Food Mixer (Stand Type) Mixer runs too slow or too fast lor speed setting. is the result of a defective or maladjusted component in the speed governing mechanism of mixers which feature continuous (no click) type speed controls. Tools and Materials Needed: a flatblade screwdriver (medium size) two pairs of universal pliers a small can of light motor oil (sewing machine type) Set the speed control nob to the "off’ position and Remove the escutcheon plate at the rear of the con- it off with the sharp edge of a paring nife. (Figure 1) Hold the control nob in the "off’ position with one hand and remove the nob fastening screw by turn- ing it counter-clockwise. CAUTION: Take care not to drop the flat washer and spring washer located under the nob screw. (Fig- Remove the control nob by pulling it straight out. thrust rod and remove straight out. (Figure 3) synchronizes the nob setting with the motor speed. A close inspection of the rod will reveal that its con- have threads and can be screwed together or apart. When the sections are screwed together to shorten the rod, the motor speed will be increased. When the sections are screwed apart to lengthen the rod, the motor speed will be decreased. If the mixer runs too slow for the control nob set- ting, the length of the thrust rod must be shortened. flat section of the rod with a pair of universal pliers. Grasp the round rear section with a second pair of universal pliers. Hold the front section steady and turn the rear section one NOTE: A drop of motor oil placed on the threads will help to loosen stuck or stubborn threads. Reassemble the mixer and for nob settings. If the mixer speed for the nob setting, repeat the adjustment of the thread rod (one full turn clockwise at a time) until mixer speed corresponds to control nob settings. flat portion of the front section aligned and fully seated in the recessed If the mixer runs too fast for the control nob setting, the thrust rod must be lengthened. 1 to 5 above, grasp the rod with two pairs of universal pliers and turn the round rear section one full turn counter-clockwise. speeds for control nob settings. Repeat the adjustment if necessary. Food Mixer (Stand Type with Continuous Speed Con- Mixer runs at full speed regardless of speed setting. as the speed control nob settings. If the mixer runs at its maximum speed regard- less of the setting of the speed control nob, a small Tools and Materials Needed: a flatblade screwdriver (medium size) Set the speed control nob to the “off’ position and speed control nob by prying it off with the sharp edge of a paring nife. Hold the speed control nob in the “off’ position with one hand, then remove the nob fastening screw by turning it counter-clockwise. (Figure 2) and spring washer located under the nob screw. Remove the speed control nob by pulling it straight the tubular-shaped “capacitor.” (Figure 3) is one of the electrical compo- nents of the speed control mechanism. identified by markings which indicate - VAC. The defects of this type of component are not isible since they occur component, therefore, is by the process of elimina- To insure correct purchase of a new replacement it may be ordered by mail the manufacturer’s parts division. Be sure to include the model number of the mixer and all of the identi- fying data printed on the capacitor in your order To remove the capacitor, press the flatblade edge of a screwdriver against the left electrical terminal Grasp the capacitor with your other hand. Pull left until the brass nipple on the To install the new replacement capacitor, reverse its proper location before replacing the speed con- Motor hums but blades do not turn. An audible humming sound produced by the motor with no isible movement of the blender blades of a “stuck” component. More often it is the blade assem- blv of the blender which becomes stuck. This is a serious that must be attended permanent damage to the motor. Tools and Materials Needed: a pair of universal pliers a bread (or meat) cutting board a ar of aseline (petroleum elly) a package of pipe cleaners an abrasive type cleaning pad (used to scour pots) dishwashing detergent (soap) Shut the blender off immediately and remove the line cord plug from the wall outlet. the blender and empty for stuck blades bv trying to turn them with If blades do not turn freely when prodded with a pencil, the blade assembly is stuck and must be dis- repair or replacement is required. procedures for three different manufactured blend- ers are given in the steps that follow. These models represent the ariety of blenders most often found the blade assembly of the blender lift the blade assembly out. NOTE: Two ersions of this type blender are manu- factured. One employs a cap nut to fasten the blades ( Figure 3) The other type perma- nently rivets the blades to the assembly. assembly. If the blades are fastened with a cap nut 3), the blade assembly can be taken apart and serviced. If the blades are permanently riveted as shown in Figure 4, the blade assembly cannot be serviced and must be replaced as a unit. To service the blade assembly shown flatblade of a screwdriver. CAUTION: Do not bend the lock tabs more than necessary to allow the cap nut to be turned. Over- bending can cause them to break. Grasp the assembly by the blades and remove the cap nut by turning it counter-clockwise with a pair caution: The blades of some model blenders have sharp edges. If so, wrap the end of a dish towel over the blades before grasping them Lift off the lock tab washer, cap washer, and blades. the remaining blade assembly upside down and tap the protruding drive shaft end against the surface of a hardwood bread board or meat cutting blade assembly housing. (Figure 8) CAUTION: Spacer washers on the drive shaft need not be removed. Take care, however, not Clean the drive shaft with an abrasive type cleanser or pad to remove rust, food residue, etc. Clean the inner recess of the blade assembly hous- ing with a folded pipe cleaner that has been dipped a dishwashing detergent Rinse all parts well under hot tap water and allow elly), to complete the servicing. To reconstruct the blade assembly, insert the drive fully into the blade assembly housing. Place the cap washer and lock tab washer on Screw the cap nut onto the drive shaft (clockwise) pliers. Make certain that the flat sides of the cap nut are aligned with the two lock tabs. Bend the lock tabs firmly against the cap nut with ( Figure ) This will prevent the cap nut from loosening and complete the reassem- bly for this type blender. CAUTION: Be sure to replace the rubber ring (gasket) ( Figure 2) before screwing the metal base to the ar. To take apart the blade assembly and remove the large nut located on the bottom of it counter-clockwise with a pair special note: Blenders that do not have detachable ar bases are older models. The disadvantage of the is the difficulty encountered in to the lower ar area and blade sembly whenever cleaning and or maintenance be- into the ar, grasp the blades and pull the blade assembly out of the ar. the blades of the assembly securely and with a pair of pliers. If blades are sharp, wrap them with a dish cloth or towel to avoid injuring fingers. Lift the blades off the assembly. chipped, bent, or otherwise defective, they should be replaced. Replacement blades are normally avail- able for purchase from local appliance repair shops. If not they may be ordered directly by mail from to specify the exact model number (located on the base plate of the blender). Turn the remaining portion of the assembly upside down and tap the drive shaft end against a meat or until the drive shaft and bearing cap are removed. (Figure ) Clean the drive shaft with an abrasive type clean- ing pad to remove all traces of rust, food residue, etc. Clean the inside of the bearing housing and bear- ing cap with a folded pipe cleaner that has been dipped in dishwashing detergent (soap). Rinse the bearing cap, bearing holder, and drive shaft well under hot tap water and allow the entire length of the drive it liberally with aseline (petroleum elly). the blade assembly and replace the ar by reversing the order in which NOTE: Two steel washers and two rubber washers (gaskets) are located above and below the bottom These may come loose when the blade assembly removed, or they may adhere to the ar and remain in place. Make certain that they are in proper posi- tion before securing the blade assembly to the ar. If either of the rubber washers be replaced at this time. SPECIAL NOTE: The blades must turn and maintenance of the blade assembly can prevent repairs. Clean the blades, Blenders which do not feature detachable ar bases are best cleaned by allowing them to run with the ar half-filled with hot water and a small quantity of dishwashing detergent (soap). Liquid leaks from bottom of ar. Liquid leaking from the ar even in small quantities can usually be detected by inspecting the area around the drive stud on top of the motor unit. Tools and Materials Needed: a pair of universal pliers NOTE: Two basic types ofjars are used with blenders. One ar is constructed with a detachable metal base that can be unscrewed for cleaning. The other constructed in one piece of glass or plastic. For detachable base ars, check to see that the ar gasket used as a seal between the ar and the detach- able metal base is correctly positioned on top of the blade assembly as shown in Figure 1. residue which may have accu- mulated on the gasket or blade assembly base. If the gasket is cracked or badly distorted, replace the ar gasket with a new one and retest the ar for leaks the blender with water if required, may be purchased from lo- cal appliance repair shops which usually stock parts for blenders of different makes. local shops, replacement parts may be ordered from include the model number of the blender which If inspection of the gasket proves that condition and was correctly placed atop the blade assembly, proceed to examine the bottom edge of the ar for cracks and or a chipped edge. is chipped or cracked, replace the ar. If examination of ar and ar gasket proves that both it means that liquid is leaking through a corrected by replacing the entire blade assembly. assembly can significantly prolong maintenance procedures. To check for a leak in the type blender that employs To remove the blade assembly, grasp the bottom ar nut with a pair of pliers and remove ing it counter-clockwise. (Figure 5) note & caution: Two types of ars, both similar in appearance, are used with this type of blender. The its intage, may be made glass. Avoid striking or subjecting glass type ars to excessive stress. into the ar, grasp the blades and pull the blade assembly straight out. caution: Blades may be sharp. Wrap dish cloth or over blades before grasping them Remove the inner and outer steel washers from the the two rubber washers (inner and outer) above and below the s bottom. NOTE: The rubber washers may have become stuck so, they must be pried the front edge of a butter nife. the two rubber washers. area and push the cap nut from side to side. 8) If the top portion (blades and cap nut) of the as- sembly can be moved sideways, it. Replace the entire blade assembly. special note: Most food blenders are sturdily con- structed and will, with normal use and reasonable care, give many years of satisfactory service. How- assembly can result ery quickly when is abused. The following suggestions will help prevent premature failure of this appliance. Do not continue to attempt to blend substances which have caused the blender blades excessively or stall. Should the blades stall while and adjust the substance being blended to avoid hard substances into the blender. The impact of damage them. Crack ice cubes into pieces intermittently during operation with loud is most likely to occur when ice or other heavy food loads are being blended. It is caused by slip- page in the coupling between the blade assembly and Invariably, the problem can be pin- to a worn component called the “drive stud. Tools and Materials Needed: an 8 penny nail (a nail about 3 inches long) 2 pairs of universal pliers NOTE: Two different makes of blenders have been chosen as examples of the most common types found ( Figures 1 and 6) The procedures described in this Problem Solver can be used to repair many other model blenders which have the same problem. Inspect the drive stud for wear. stud is worn, replace it with a new one. To remove the drive stud from the blender model shown in Figure 1, turn the motor unit down on its side and insert an 8 penny nail through one of the between the blades of the entilating fan. NOTE: Positioning the nail as described above will lock the motor shaft and prevent continuing to hold the motor shaft locked with the steel washer which will come loose when the drive stud is removed. (Figure 5) NOTE: A drive stud replacement can be purchased to include the model number of the blender and refer to the part by name: "Drive Stud." 5. When replacing the drive between the entilating fan blades to lock the mo- tightened (clockwise). To remove the drive stud for the blender model another pair of pliers. Hold the slinger steady and note & caution: The purpose of the slinger liquids which may have motor of the blender where serious damage could it rotates with the motor, any liquid spillage that comes in contact with steel washer which may come loose when the drive stud Electric Fan (Table Top or Window Type) Rattling noise during operation. A loose metal emblem, blade guard wire, or other com- ponent of the fan framework will often produce a loud Tools and Materials Needed: a pair of universal pliers a set of Allen wrenches (inexpensive sets are avail- able from most local hardware stores) a short length (one foot) of bailing wire To locate the point from which the rattle nating in a table top fan, first operate the fan until in operation, press a against the metal emblem (if used). rattle stops when the emblem is held, it is probably loose and should be tightened. NOTE: Emblems (when used) are usually fastened to the blade guard with small metal tabs that fold over the blade guard wires. (Figure 2) To tighten the emblem to the blade guard, switch oft fan, remove the line cord from the wall outlet, until fan blades come the metal fastening tabs securely around the blade guard wires with a pair of pliers. (Figure 2) To check for noise caused by the blade guard, press (especially where guard wires point is touched that stops the noise. Switch off fan. Remove the line cord plug from the cross (and are fastened) for broken welds. (Figure 3) To repair broken guard wire welds, wrap a piece of bailing wire across both guard wires curely. (figures 4 and If examination proves that metal emblem and blade guard are secure, inspect the fan blades to see that: Blades do not come in contact with the blade To check for noise caused by a fan blade striking the blade guard, disconnect the fan from the elec- tric outlet, and slowly turn the fan blades by hand. through the hand. Stop turning the fan blades when to locate the exact point of contact. special note: Contact between the fan blades and blade guard is often the result of a bent blade guard wire(s). Care should be exercised when handling or storing a fan to avoid striking or otherwise distort- ing the blade guard. Special precautions should be to position a fan securely to prevent Bent blade guard wires may be formed by ad- usting them manually until blade elearance is loose on the motor shaft, tighten the set serew located on the fan blade hub. (Figure 8) NOTE: Fan blades are usually secured to the motor shaft with a screw having a recessed head called an Allen head. An Allen wrench of appropriate size needed to tighten this type of screw. To tighten the Allen set screw, reach through the back of the blade guard, insert the Allen wrench into the screw head and turn To locate the point from which the rattling noise is originating in a window fan, repeat the procedure outlined in steps 2 through above. and location of window fans, they may produce rat- tling noises that are caused by components other sources of noise are the expandable side panels of the window fan and the window itself. To locate window rattles, press along window sash- es until noise stops. Insert a small wood or rubber wedge between window sash and window frame to stop the rattle. (Figure ) rattles originating from panels while the fan is in operation until a point reached where pressure stops the rattle. insert a small wood or rubber wedge between the expandable panel and the sta- panes will disclose loose glass panels. These should Electric Fan (Table Top and Window Type) Any degree of ibration that can be noticed when a fan caused by an unbalanced fan blade. Fan blades can be- come unbalanced when fans are dropped or whenever Tools and Materials Needed: None Disconnect fan plug from wall fan blades come to a stop. Check the fan blade guard for distortion. Straighten bent blade guard wires by bending them back into correct shape manually. fan blade guard and turn the fan blades slowly by hand. Using a single reference point on the front portion of the blade guard, check to see that each blade is the same distance from that note: Fan blades that from the reference point must be bent into align- ment with all other blades. To align bent fan blades, reach through the blade all blades are equally distanced from any reference point on the rear position of the Connect fan to electric wall outlet after each adjust- ment and check fan ibration. Repeat steps 4 and 5, is no excessive ibration. NOTE: The procedures outlined above are usually to correct fan blades that are severely damaged and show cracks, tears, and or deep nicks should be replaced. Replacement of fan blades should be performed by a qualified appliance repair technician. Electric Fan (Table Top Type or Window Type) Fan will not start unless blades are turned by hand. Fans that need a starting push to get them going gener- ally need lubrication. In most cases, two or three drops of oil placed in appropriate locations will make the fan Tools and Materials Needed: a small dispensing can of motor oil (about 2 oz. of a flatblade screwdriver (medium size) a small dispensing can of penetrating oil (rust dis- fan blades come to a stop. Test to see that the fan blades turn freely. Spin the blades by hand and observe how they come abruptly or if any opposition can be equipped with external lubricating oil to the motor bearings. Fans that do not provide oil ports are usually advertised as hav- the self-lubricating qualities of these bearings en- able the parts to maintain a low degree of friction, thus allowing a fan to start and run properly. Dur- ing periods of idleness, however, moisture and oth- er corrosive elements in the air can cause the mo- therefore require additional To lubricate the front bearing of a table top type tilt the fan back and place three drops of oil on the motor shaft. Keep the fan for several minutes to allow the Spin the fan blades once or twice by hand so that is distributed thoroughly into the bearing. To lubricate the rear bearing, access to the bearing First take off the rear motor cap. Remove the screw than one screw may be used) that fastens the cap to the motor by turning it counter-clockwise with a screwdriver. Tilt the fan forward and place three drops of oil between the motor shaft and rear bearing. (Figure 3) Spin the fan blades once or twice by hand while the fan is still tilted forward. sufficient; otherwise of motor). Wipe excess oil off with rag. Replace the motor cap securely and operate the fan for about five minutes. test the fan blades to see that they turn freely. motors than do table top models, and they come equipped with oil ports; the accessible openings of small diameter tubes that lead directly to the motor (Step 2) If the fan sticks, proceed as follows. First make sure that dust or other foreign matter has not clogged the front and rear oil ports. Clear Place three drops of oil into each oil port and oper- ate the fan for about five minutes. (Figure 5) special NOTE: In some severe cases, possible to free the fan motor shaft by the normal oil should be applied to the motor shaft bearings and allowed Then, the steps outlined above should be followed fan motor bearings (one or two drops of oil) at least once a month when the fan is used continuously, six months during idle or Electric Table Top Fan (Oscillating Tvpe) Fan will not oscillate. The back-and-forth motion of an oscillating type fan de- pends upon a series of parts that link the rotating shaft of the motor to the fan motor swivel. The oscillating ac- tion can be disrupted or stopped completely by even minor defects in the oscillating mechanism. Tools and Materials Needed: a flatblade screwdriver (medium size) a pair of universal pliers a precaution, make certain oscillating. (Figure 1 ) If the fan fails to oscillate or oscillates intermittently even when the control nob is in its correct position, the components of the oscillating mechanism must be checked to pinpoint the problem. fan plug from the electric outlet and wait until the fan blades come to a stop. Remove the oscillator control nob. Place a screw- driver in the slot of the oscillating screw. Keep the screw from turning with the screwdriver, and un- screw the control nob until CAUTION: Place the oscillating screw and washers safely aside to avoid losing them. (Figure 3) special note: Although many types mechanisms have been used in different makes and Problem Solver is of ordinary design and often used by many manufacturers. scribe servicing procedures that are basic and that that no contact can be made between the fan motor and swing manually. The fan motor should swing freely. is difficult to move (stuck), lubricate the fan motor lubricating oil into the swivel oint. proceed to check the oscillating cam. operate. Watch to see if the oscillating cam rotates. (Figure 4) If the oscillating cam does not rotate, the problem lies within the gear section of the mechan- ism. Further testing and service should be performed by a qualified appliance technician only. If the oscillating cam does Examine the link bar. If link bar is bent, straighten it with a pair of pliers. for worn pivots. Grasp tilts or excessive motion can be felt, tighten the pivot screw until excess motion pivot screw. Loose, bent or broken rivet type pivots must be replaced by a qualified appliance technician. to either forego the use oscillating feature and use it as a stationary fan or loose pivot serew, hold nut with a pair of pliers and turn the pivot screw clockwise with a screwdriver. It should not be possible to over-tighten the a point which would prevent link bar from swiveling. If the link bar does become locked when the pivot screw is tightened, the pivot screw is worn and must be replaced. Special individ- ual parts such as the pivot screw may or may not be made available for replacement. Often these small parts are supplied as part of a complete replacement assembly, which might as many corresponding parts as required whenever Reassemble cam bar to oscillator cam by replacing Place a drop of lubricating oil on each pivot end of the link bar and on the oscillating cam to com- special NOTE: Periodic lubrication of the fan swiv- el and the oscillating linkage pivots will minimize parts wear and oscillator failure. Hair Dryer (Hat Box Type) Air turns cool after short period of operation. Anything that prevents the full flow of air through the dryer can cause the heat producing element to overheat. excessive heat and automatically shut the heating ele- ment off before it can be damaged. Tools and Materials Needed: a flatblade screwdriver (medium size) a phillips screwdriver (medium size) a one-inch paint brush blocked. Do not place anything over the air intake grille that could prevent the intake of air. (Figure 1) Make certain that the plastic cap provides enough Examine the hose to see that NOTE: Hoses that have collapsed cannot be repaired and must be replaced. To clean a clogged hose or replace a collapsed hose witha new one, the hose must be disconnected from To disconnect the hose, remove the dryer housing screws with a screwdriver. NOTE: Screwdriver needed may be either flatblade or phillips type depending upon the type of screws Lift the top half of the dryer housing up and NOTE: New replacement hoses can be purchased for most model hair dryers at local appliance repair shops. If not available locally, they may be ordered directly from nearest manufacturer s parts supply If hose and plastic cap assembly are in good order, the motor-blower assembly located inside the dryer housing should be examined. to the motor-blower assembly, the control nob to the “off position. Then remove it by pulling it straight out. Lift top half of housing up (after housing screws have been removed, Figure 2) Remove accumulation of dust, hair, etc., on the mo- tor with a clean soft paint brush. Pick off hair which may have become entwined around the motor shaft with a pair of tweezers. special note: A great deal of dust, matter is drawn into hair dryers during normal use. assembly at least once every six months. Lift motor-blower assembly out of bottom half of dryer housing and brush clean the blower impeller and lower housing. (Figure 7) Make certain that blower impeller can turn freely To reassemble dryer, place motor-blower assembly carefully into the lower half of the dryer housing. (Figure 5) Place the hose end into the lower housing fitting. (Figure 3) Position the top half of the dryer housing in place and replace the control nob by position). (Figure 4) Replace the dryer housing screws to complete the Hair Dryer (Hand Held Type) Dryer blows cool air only. The absence of any heated heating element in the hair dryer. Tools and Materials Needed: a flatblade screwdriver (medium size) a phillips screwdriver (small size) a pair of heavy-duty scissors (poultry shears) two porcelain wire nuts ( 2) the heating element, remove cord plug from the wall outlet before performing any work on the dryer. NOTE: In hand held dryers such as the type illustrat- ed in Figure 1, the heating element is located direct- ly behind the grille in the front of the nozzle. The dryer case must be disassembled to gain access to the dryer case, remove screws by turning them counter-clockwise with a grille off and carefully separate the case heating element wire. If the insulated wire connect- the heating element must NOTE: Heating elements for dryers made by leading repair shop. Replacement heating elements for less familiar makes of dryers will prob- facturers parts supply division. To remove the burned-out heating element, cut the remaining lead wires as close to the heating element as possible with either a diagonal wire-cutting pliers (if available) or a pair of heavy-duty itchen shears Lift the element out of its recessed mount and set it aside to be used for comparison with the replace- ment heating element. the replacement heating element, prepare the two lead wires that are to be connected the heating element wires by cutting through wire ends) with a sharp paring nife. ( Figure CAUTION: Take care not to cut into the copper wire. Pull each piece of cut insulation off the wire ends. Place the replacement heating element into position in the dryer nozzle and connect the bare ends of the dryer wires to the bare ends of the element wires by twisting them together clockwise. Insulate each wire connection with a porcelain wire nut. Push the wire nut over the connection and turn CAUTION: Make sure that the insulated connection wires are clear of the heating element. Reassemble both halves of the case making sure that the connecting wires are not pinched between front nozzle and replace the grille screws to complete the repair. Hair Dryer (Portable) Excessive noise during operation. abusively handled, could cause the impeller housing to be moved out of proper alignment with the impeller blades. This would cause the impeller to strike a portion of the housing and thus produce an objectionable noise. Tools and Materials Needed: a phillips screwdriver (medium size) a pair of universal pliers a small squeeze bottle of white resin type (all pur- Remove the screws used to fasten the top cover to the lower half of the dryer case by turning them counter-clockwise with a phillips screwdriver. to cover case screws with decorative escutcheons of name plates. These name plates must often be re- moved to reveal the location of case screws. Remove the name plate by carefully prving up one corner of the plate with a paring nife. Grasp the loosened corner of the plate and remove CAUTION: Take care not too sharply to avoid permanent creases. Remove additional case screws located under name straight up and out. (Figure 4) If the control nob needs repair, “Plastic Parts” for complete details. Lift the top of the case up and off the lower case Make sure impeller housing is in correct position, tighten hexagon head screws with a pair of If the plastic impeller housing it can be repaired. Refer to Section 2, Gen- eral Repair Procedures, on how to repair plastic components. test for correct alignment of strike housing, loosen housing until impeller clears housing. To reassemble the dryer, place the top portion of die case onto the lower section. (Figure 5) the switch control nob side of the nob shaft matches the switch shaft. (Figure 4) Replace all the case fastening screws. Carefully smooth the name plate so that flat atop the case. Coat the lower side of the name plate with glue and allow the glue to become tacky before pressing the name plate onto the case. Cuts can intermittently. The ability of a can opener to cut evenly and continuous- wheel. A dull or stuck cutter wheel can cause skip cut- ting and in severe cases can cause the can to be dropped from the opener during operation. Tools and Materials Needed: a screwdriver (medium (flatblade or phillips a can of scouring cleanser (abrasive type) a ar of petroleum elly NOTE: Make sure that the operating lever cutter wheel to pierce the can. to do so can lead to the mistaken assumption that the can opener is malfunctioning. Observe the cutter wheel when can opener ting a can. The cutter wheel must turn along with removed, cleaned, and lubricated. the can from the opener and disconnect the line cord plug from the wall outlet. CAUTION: Do not attempt to turn the cutter wheel is stuck. Cutter wheels can be sharp enough to cut your fingers. wheel screw completely out counter-clockwise with a flatblade screwdriver. behind the cutter wheel. CAUTION: Use care when grasping the cutter wheel to avoid cutting fingers. If wheel with the flatblade of a screwdriver. Examine the cutter wheel for sharpness. repair shops and parts sup- rust and accumulation To clean the wheel thoroughly, pour enough abra- ty pe cleanser onto a dampened cloth to form a sides of the cutter wheel food residue and rust are removed. the point of a paring nife to remove rust and food wheel screw with paring nife. Rinse it under warm tap water. Scrape food residue from the cutter wheel spring Clean the cutter wheel post. Allow the wheel, wheel screw, wheel spring, and wheel post to dry, then coat each with a ery light film of petroleum elly. Place the cutter wheel spring over the wheel post; wheel screw. Turn the screw clockwise until tight. NOTE: Make certain that the cutter wheel SPECIAL NOTE: The cutter wheel should be cleaned periodically by brushing it with soap and water and of bacteria, and insure more Can opener does not operate. Ifyou find that the wall outlet has power (check by plug- ging in another appliance) the most switch. The contact points of can opener cleaned to restore operation. Tools and Materials Needed a phillips screwdriver a pair of universal pliers a fingernail emery board Disconnect the line cord plug from the wall outlet. Remove the case screws by turning them counter- Grasp the operating lever with one hand and the tlie can opener assembly. (Figure 2) the switch cover plate screw by turning it counter-clockwise with a pair of pliers. Lift the switch cover plate off to expose the switch Lower the operating lever onto the switch button it will go. Check to see that the upper movable switch contact touches the lower with the operating lever. (Figure 5) If the upper contact point does not touch the lower contact, bend the lower contact point upward with a pair of tweezers to shorten the gap between both contact points. (Figure 6) Check to see that contact is made only when the operating lever depresses the switch button. is bent too far upward, contact between the points will be continuous and the can opener will not shut “off.” touch) by rubbing both points ery lightlv with the "fine’ side of an emery board. (Figure 7) Reassemble the switch cover plate and can opener case to complete the repair. Rotisserie (Vertical Spit Type) Heating element glows red but spit does not turn. The spit which rotates the roast or poultry in this type of is coupled and driven by a small electric motor. If the spit does not engage the motor drive securely, Tools and Materials Needed: special note: Make certain that roasts, poultry, etc., size. Oversize meats with protruding portions may contact ment or cover and prevent the (either direction). (Figure 1) If turntable spins freely, is not engaged with the drive Remove the turntable tray ( Figure 2) and inspect that food particles and or other substances is clogged, clear the slot with a paper clip bent open as shown in Figure 4. and test to see that they are engaged. NOTE: When properly engaged, the turntable tray freely when pushed by hand. rotate when the rotisserie is operated, the problem is caused bv a more serious defect of the gears or motor, and should be brought to a qualified service technician for further testing and repairs. Lady's Electric Shavers Lady’s Electric Shaver An electric razor will “pinch” when hair when the cutter head Tools and Materials Needed: toilet water (or men’s after shave lotion) Inspect the head (comb and cutter assembly) If teeth are broken, replace the entire head. Remove as you would normally NOTE: Replacement heads may be purchased from local factory authorized service shops. If the shaver head has no broken teeth, hone the head to restore its sharpness. To hone the head, rub a small quantity of tooth- razor for about two minutes. under hot water to remove the toothpaste. Wipe the head with a finger moistened with toilet razor for improved cutting abilitv. If necessary, repeat steps 4, 5, and 6 until the razor cuts cleanly without pinching. Lachjs Electric Shavers Lady’s Electric Shaver Razor runs too slow (may pinch). Brush cleaning alone does not remove accumulations of an electric razor. These solid particles build to excess and reduce the speed of the razor by preventing the free movement of the cutting head. Tools and Materials Needed: cleaning brush (supplied with razor) a small saucer or ashtray a bottle of toilet water or men’s after shave lotion as is usually done before or after each use. cutting head and brush below the cutting head. routine cleaning may arv facturer’s instructions. The cleaning procedure de- scribed in the steps that follow will wash and lubri- cate the cutting head and should be applied period- head from becoming clogged. Replace the cutting head. shave lotion into a small saucer or ashtray. (Figure 4) Start the razor and immerse the cutting head in the toilet water. (Figure minute or so and allow excess toilet water to drip off. NOTE: Do not wipe die head dry. Allow razor to air dry for a few minutes before using. General Repair Procedures Fuses and Circuit Breakers Fuses and Circuit Breakers Locate and replace a blown fuse. safety devices. Their purpose house wires from damage. When a fuse blows, indication that the demand for electric power has ex- ceeded the safe carrying capacity of the of the electric power is designed to melt apart when the electric power flowing through is excessive and gen- erates more heat than the metal fuse link can withstand. The types of fuses most commonly found are constructed with a screw base and are called plug fuses. There are three common arieties of plug fuses: ( 2 ) standard base, time delay; and fuses are designed to withstand short periods of exces- sive electric power draw without blowing. This feature is especially useful in house circuits that supply motor- etc.). The ordinary standard base and tamperproof base fuses are generally adequate for use with heating appliances. Tools and Materials Needed: peres—and type as original) is suspected of having blown, turn Fuses and Circuit Breakers appear blackened or clouded. note: Some electric lines use two fuses for protection. 4. Remove the suspect fuse by unscrewing usually printed on the metal edge surrounding window and on the small metal contact is always wise to anticipate the possibility of a fuse blowing and to eep an assortment of replace- ment fuses available near the fuse box. Select a replacement fuse that blown fuse and screw the new fuse note and caution: Standard base plug fuses are made available in sizes of 5 amps, amps, amps, amps, amps, and amps. Since the screw bases of these fuse with one which has rating. Tamperproof plug listed above. Their screw base construction, however, does not permit different screw bases are provided for each electrical size. After fuses have been replaced, turn on appliances, lights, and other electrical apparatus that had gone fuse blows again when appliance or other electrical apparatus is turned on, the electrical overload still present and must he dis- connected from the power line. In most instances, the faulty appliance or other electrical apparatus can be identified by elimination. This will require a systematic trial of each appliance. If, however, the defective ap- paratus cannot he isolated after a reasonable effort has heen made, a licensed electrician should be called correct the condition. Replace a two-prong male plug. Explanation: Many types of male plugs are on the market; however, most are not suitable for use on heat-producing appli- ances. The type of plug recommended ferred to as a “heavy-duty male plug” and Tools and Materials Needed: a heavy-duty two-prong male plug any electrical hardware store) a flatblade screwdriver (medium size) 1. Remove the defective plug by cutting the line cord about one-half inch before the plug; then discard eliminate anv weakened, oxidized wire that might interfere with the opera- tion of the new plug. (when encountered) by slitting caution: Take care not to cut through the inner wire 3. Remove about one inch of the inner rubber insula- tion from each wire end. (Figure 3) caution: Avoid cutting any of the 4. Feed the wire ends of the remaining prepared line cord through the replacement male plug and an ‘‘Underwriter’s not as shown in steps a, b, and 5. Twist the loose strands of each wire end together caution: Carefully straighten the wire strands before strands from puncturing fingers. Pull the Underwriter’s not down into the cavity 7. Loosen both terminal screws of the plug, but do Bring each line cord wire end around the back of screws in a clockwise direction. 9. Cut off any excess wire that protrudes from under the terminal screw heads and tighten the screws note: Make certain that there are no loose strands of wire that can touch both of the plug prongs and cause Slide the fiber cover plate over the prongs. Replace a female appliance plug. enient method of disconnecting the line cord from the appliance. Female appliance plugs ary some have as many as three cavities. The female plug the type commonly used for coffee makers, waffle bakers, and other appliances therefore, more often encountered. this female plug can be ap- plied to all other arieties of this plug. Tools and Materials Needed: a female appliance plug (available at any electrical hardware store) a flatblade screwdriver (medium size) 1. Cut the defective plug off by cutting the line cord match new replacement plug to 3. Remove the screws that fasten the two halves the new plug together. (Figure 3 ) caution: Take care not to drop the two nuts. 4. Remove about three-quarters of an inch of insula- line cord wire ends with caution: Do not cut off any strands from wire ends. 5. Twist wire strands together tightly and form each wire end into a hook. Terminals and Wire Connectors 6. Loosen (do not remove) the two terminal screws in terminal connectors. the hooked wire ends under the terminal screws in a clockwise direction and tighten terminal screws Place terminal connections into cavities in the plug Put other half of plug body in place and put plug touch each other. Check to he sure that wire in plug groove and does not obstruct assembly. Terminals and Wire Connectors Connect a wire end to a terminal. In an electrical circuit, any point to which a wire end is called a terminal. Terminals provide a convenient means of connecting electrical parts to their respective wires. In appliances, the most common types wire differently, the preparation of the wire ends will depend upon the type of terminal used. Terminals and Wire Connectors Tools and Materials Needed: a flatblade screwdriver (medium size) solderless wire connector quired) purchased at electrical hardware store (for solderless wire connectors), available at local electrical hardware store a pair of long-nose pliers note: A wire may be connected in one of two ways. In the first, the bare wire end placed under the head of the terminal screw. second, an appropriate type of solderless terminal con- to the wire end. The terminal is then placed under the terminal screw. 2. To prepare the hooked wire type first remove about one-half inch of wire covering (insulation) from the wire end. and pull the cut insulation off the wire end. caution: When cutting insulation, make certain that is not nicked or otherwise damaged by strand of copper), simply form the bare end into tip of a pair of long-nose Terminals and Wire Connectors If the wire uncovered is stranded (many strands of fine wire) (Figure 4 ), twist the strands together ( Figure 5); then form a hook with the tip of the long-nose Place the hare wire hook under the loosened minal screw, with the hook end facing the direc- Tighten the terminal screw securely with a screw- caution: Do not overtighten terminal screw. caution: Make sure that none of the wire insulation gets under the terminal screw caution: Only one hooked wire end should be placed under any one terminal screw. If more than one wire is to a single terminal screw, the wire ends must first be prepared with an appropriate solder- less terminal connector. ( Figure 9) The steps that fol- terminal connectors on wire ends for use under termi- Terminals and Wire Connectors the wire end. Insert the bare wire end into the wire connector as far as insulation permits. (Figure ) Fasten the wire connector to the wire by placing it halfway into the appropriate size aw opening of the crimping tool and squeezing the tool handles Solderless terminal connectors are made in many sizes and types. Three important speci- to be considered when less terminal connectors for use with terminal screws. They are: the size (thickness) of the wire on which is to be installed; the size (thickness) screw body onto which it will connect; and the neces- sary shape of the terminal connector (spade- or ring- is always best to take the old terminal connector along with you hardware store so that it can be matched with the one 8. When the male terminal spade a terminal screw, the wire end must be prepared with a solderless female terminal connector, which may be purchased in any electrical hardware store. To prepare the wire end and terminal connector, refer to steps 6 and 7 for the necessary procedures. . Clean the male terminal spade of any dust or dirt it lightly with an emery board. . Connect the female terminal to the male terminal Join wires with solderless wire connectors. electrical terms the oining of two or more electric wires is commonly referred to as “splicing When prop- erly made, a splice produces a wire connection that good mechanical bond (wires do not come apart) and a electricity). The two splicing techniques described the following steps can be adapted to cover practically all repair situations that require the oining of wires. Tools and Materials Needed: a solderless sleeve connector a length of "spaghetti” insulation a wire nut, available from local electrical hardware is determined by the size and number a small piece of fine sandpaper of splice which would note: The splice shown in Figure less sleeve connector and is used whenever space and Figure 2 uses a wire nut (simple to install) and can be used whenever space is not a problem or the insulating protection afforded by the wire nut 2. To complete the splice shown in Figure 1, remove a length of insulation (from each wire end) equal to the length of the solderless sleeve connector to it from the wire ends. (Figure 3 ) Next, cut a piece of spaghetti insulation twice the length of the solderless sleeve connector. ( from opposite directions ) into the sleeve connector. Fasten the sleeve connector to the wires by plac- in the center of the sleeve connector Slide the spaghetti insulation into place over the 8. To complete the splice shown in Figure 2, remove about one-half inch of insulation from each wire end with a paring nife. 9. Clean the wire ends with sandpaper. twist to the end of the wires with a pair of pliers. Press wire nut onto wire ends and turn nut clock- is securely attached. caution: Make certain that the wire nut covers If not, length of twisted wire ends Plastic wire nuts can be used in which they will not be subjected to extreme heat. Porcelain wire nuts should be used whenever they are to be exposed to high temperatures. The material (insulation) used to cover electrical wires acts as a barrier to the How of electricity. Different ma- terials are used to cover wire. In addition to their elec- trical insulating qualities, these materials must be capa- the extreme conditions appliances. These conditions or grease, high degree heat, and the presence of excessive moisture. Therefore, it becomes necessary to replace wire insula- tion, the material used must have the same qualities as that of the original covering. Tools and Materials Needed: " wide electrical insulating tape trical friction tape, electrical plastic tape, or fiber- 1. Determine the type of insulating material required. note: Electrical friction tape (cloth), electrical plastic tape, and fiberglass tape are three common types of in- that are readily available from any for practically every wire repair that requires insulation. Friction tape cloth material that contains a black tar-like substance. It can be used for a general repair work as long as to extreme heat or moisture. Plastic tape is a strong elastic type material that whenever a high degree of electrical insulating qual- Fiberglass tape, because of its non-inflammable, heat- proof characteristics, should be used whenever insula- in a condition of extreme heat. the insulating tapes discussed above are applied in the Begin at a point on the wire about one inch from the bare section to be insulated. (Figure I) Mending Heating Elements 4. Overlap each turn one-half the width of the tape. 5. Continue wrapping tape for at least one inch past the hare wire section to complete one layer of in- note: Two layers of insulating tape are generally used for added security, whenever the additional hulk thus Begin wrapping second the point at which the first layer ended. (Figure 4) 7. Continue wrapping (overlap one-half the width of the tape each turn ) back began and cut tape with scissors second layer. (Figure 5 ) Mending Heating Elements Mend broken heating element wire. The practice of mending broken (parted) heating ele- is only a temporary measure. to restore the operation of an appliance gency need, or when a new replacement element available from supply sources. When properly mended, life of heating elements can be extended for many years. Rejoining broken (parted) heating ele- ment wire requires the use of fastening devices that can withstand the intense operating heat produced by the wire. Three methods have proven of mending element wire. Thev include the use of a mending sleeve, a nut and bolt, or effective method of the three is the use of the blind rivet because of Mending Heating Elements holding power and the fact that it will not become loose. Otherwise, the selection of the type of fastener to be used will depend upon availability and or the relative scribe the procedures for employing each of the three Tools and Materials Needed: listed are available from Repair Method Employing Mending Sleeve a solderless sleeve wire connector Repair Method Employing Nut and Bolt a pair of long-nose pliers a flatblade screwdriver (medium size) Repair Method Employing Blind Rivet a back-up washer (1 8" hole) for use with rivet a blind riveting tool rejoin broken element wire with fourth inch of both wire ends with long-nose pliers. Insert the wire ends into the solderless sleeve con- 3. Crush the wire connector with a pair of pliers to 4. To rejoin broken element wire with a brass nut and bolt, form both wire ends into loops. Mending Heating Elements Insert bolt through wire loops and thread on the the nut and bolt securely with driver and pliers to complete the mend. 7. To rejoin broken heating element wire with a blind rivet, form both ends into loops. Insert rivet mandrel into rivet tool nosepiece. Insert the rivet through the wire loops and place back-up washer on bottom of rivet. Fasten the rivet with the riveting tool. Squeeze the handles of the tool firmly until the rivet mandrel snapped free of rivet. . This completes the mend. Connecting Heating Elements Connecting Heating Elements Connect heating element wire to a terminal screw. In many appliances, the heating element wires are con- spection of an element wire that fails to heat will often disclose that the end of the element wire has burned or broken away from a terminal screw. A good heating terminal connection must be cure (good conductor of electricity), and prevent the intense operating heat of the element wire from reaching and destroying the terminal screw. The steps below describe a method of reconnecting heating Tools and Materials Needed: a pair of long-nose pliers a pair of universal pliers the terminal nut by unscrewing the terminal screw with the universal pliers. 2. Remove the two metal washers. Make certain that the broken piece of heating element wire located between the metal washers Inspect the metal washers and terminal nut. minal nut and washers appear badly overheated replace them with new Straighten approximately two ment wire end with the long-nose pliers. Replace one metal washer on the terminal screw. 6. Wrap the element wire one turn around the termi- nal screw, allowing at least one inch of the wire to extend out from the screw. (Figure 4) Insert the second metal washer onto the terminal Replace the terminal nut and with the universal pliers. caution: Do not overtighten wire may be crushed and damaged. Twist the end of the element wire extending out to complete the terminal connec- Mend a broken plastic appliance control nob. Explanation: Appliance control nobs crack most where they grip the metal shafts of switches. Tools and Materials Needed: a small tube of plastic cement (available at hardware stores and children’s hobby a spool of nylon sewing thread Locate small piece of control nob which has been Carefully apply plastic cement from tube along the edges of the break. (Figure 2) Replace the broken piece onto the nob and hold the piece firmly in place until the cement begins to dry (about one minute). (Figure 3) (Figure 4) Make certain thread 5. Coat the wound thread with low cement to dry thoroughly ( about two hours ) to Mend cracked or broken plastic appliance parts. Explanation: The use of plastic materials in the construction of mod- materials have many advantages over some of the metal tage is that plastics are good insulators, and when made into appliance parts that are to be handled by the user, they greatly reduce the possibility of electric shock. normal use, plastic appliance parts can endure as well as most of the previously used metals. Under abnormal dropped or struck, plastic components can be cracked or pieces can be broken off. Tools and Materials Needed: a tube of plastic cement an epoxy cement it (transparent) a small roll of masking tape ( " wide) a sheet of fine ( ) sandpaper a handful of fine steel wool a number of wooden toothpicks Determine the type of cement note: Many types of plastic materials are used for the of appliance components. purposes, however, we shall only determine how the particular type of plastic to be mended will respond to the two commonly used actually welding them however, that are not affected by plastic cement. For is best to use an epoxy cement. 2. To pretest the effectiveness of plastic cement, ap- ply a small drop of the cement with a toothpick on a portion of the plastic part that cannot normally of cement with a toothpick. plastic surface is softened ( gummy) by the cement, it indicates that the plastic cement will work well. If the plastic remains hard, the epoxy cement will have to be used instead. to be oined are clean. Wash plastic parts with soap and water oil or grease. Dry thoroughly. edges of both broken pieces. Press pieces together firmly and hold them together steadily until cement starts masking tape taut so that it holds the pieces firmly If mended crack mars the ap- pearance of the appliance, it may he refinished to Besides restoring the scratches that accumulate through normal use on the luster. This may he accomplished hy following steps For mended cracks and deep scratches, first smooth it lightly with a piece of fine all deep scratches have been removed with rub area with steel wool until all fine scratches left by sandpaper are removed. Area should now take on a smooth but hazy appearance. water. Fold the cloth into a tight pad. (Figure 6) cloth and polish plastic area (rub back and in straight, even strokes) . Wipe toothpaste off with soft, clean dry cloth and inspect degree of luster obtained. factory, repeat polishing with more toothpaste un- is satisfactorilv restored. . To mend plastic components with epoxy cement, first clean plastic with soap and water Prepare an adequate quantity of epoxy cement for two ingredients. These ingredients must be mixed gredients are mixed, the hardening process begins. caution: Use care and avoid unnecessary contact with epoxy ingredients when working with follow manufacturer's precautions and instructions. After epoxy cement has been prepared, complete 6, and 7. However, be sure to allow epoxy cement before removing masking tape or trying to restore plastic Wo Longar fho prop ry of the The Date Due Card in the pocket indi- cates the date on or before which this book should be returned to the Library. Among the many appliances and problems illustrated, describe and handled in this olume are: Toaster does not heat Bread dp s not stay down Heating element does not come on Coffee has poor flavor Coffee too weak or too strong Pan-fried food sticks and or burns at Mixer runs at full speed regardless of Rattling noise during operation Fan will not oscillate Air turns cool after short period of Dryer blows cool air only In addition, simple maintenance tasks involving fuses, plugs, terminals, and wire connectors, heating element wire, and plastic components for electric appliances are described and illustrated.