How appliances operate How to make minor repairs How to analyze trouble Digitized by the Internet Archive http: www.archive.org details carerepairofyour605tric EDITORS and ENGINEERS, ltd. Copyright © by Editors and Engineers, Augusta, Indiana. Printed in the United States of America. is assumed with respect to the use of the information contained herein. While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, no warranty claims any liability for results of the use hereof, liability being assumed by the user hereof. Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 21513 If any one thing characterizes the modern home, the sixty-cycle hum of electric motors working quietly in in the house. One motor pumps eep food fresh and palatable for days and weeks. An- other motor strokes an clothes sparkling clean. Still another tumbles the clothes warmest summer day can. minimum amount of maintenance give uninterrupted service. The homeowner who is gifted with some mechanical aptitude will discover, on reading failures. In the case of a serious failure or a major replacement, the services of a capable technician The theory, functioning, electrical characteristics, and major components of four typical major appliances are covered in this book. Each type of major home appliance is similar to all others of the same general type in nearly all respects. Thus here the emphasis how's and why's of an appliance so that the reader with some degree of mechanical and electrical now-how can Whenever one detail of functioning in a particular make differs from that found described. No attempt has been made matter of common sense. By the intelligent use of this book, many hours of delay in obtaining a serviceman for minor repairs can be elim- inated, and many dollars of expense can be saved. Test Equipment—Electrical Testing—Preventive nance—Electric Motors Used in Home Appliances—Per- Works—Defrosting—Refrigerator Combinations—Electrical Troubleshooting Guide Tumbler Washers—Agitator Washers—Automatic Wash- Checks—Troubleshooting Guide Gas Dryers—Electric Dryers—Troubleshooting Guide Major home appliances need major source of energy, least as a secondary one to provide light for control panels, to drive motors, and to run clocks. Even the automatic gas water heater, with no generated current flow to hold open a gas solenoid alve. It is important, then, for you to have a good understand- ing of the properties of electricity, as well as nating current and direct current. When direct current lishments and has no application To gain a better understanding of the electrical com- should have a speaking electrical terms. Most electricity draw a comparison between electricity flowing through a wire and water flowing through a will be no exception, for of illustrating the behavior of speed through its "pipes." is a measure of electromotive force, or sure, without regard to flow; pressure of water, whether is moving or standing, is measured by a oltmeter. Amperage, or current, current flows through a conductor; to gallons per minute of water flow through a pipe. The of current measurement measured by an ammeter. is the opposition a conductor offers to the flow of an electrical current. This opposition in a conduc- tor may be compared to pipes of small and large diameter. The small-diameter pipe restricts the rate of flow diameter wire has a higher resistance). A large-diameter pipe would permit more gallons of water to flow past a given point per minute (large-diameter wire has a lower resistance). The unit of resistance is the power required to do work. Electrical power is measured in watts and can be related to horse- is equal to watts. In simple terms, power olts times amperes. Power measured by a wattmeter. which ac changes direction. All communities in the United States have cycle ac, meaning that the current changes direction times each second some countries supplies are cycles per second. Fuses are used to protect the house wiring system and the appliance from overloads and usually consist of a strip of metal which melts at a rela- tively low temperature. When the fuse flows through the metal ust as it would through any good conductor. If a sudden surge of current (high amperage) occurs, due to a short circuit or an overload, the acceler- ated rate of flow of electricity through the narrow strip of metal will generate enough heat to melt In some appliances, notably garbage disposers, a mo- mentary overload is normal during the time necessary for is used. This type of fuse ^ill tolerate an overload for a short period, but it ^ill if a short circuit develops. Fuses are of the screw-in or plug type lB). Usually plug fuses are . Two types of house fuses. used in - olt lines, ^hile cartridge fuses may be used - olt and higher power amperes, indicating the maximum amount of current the metal strip or internal element will carry without melt- (blowing). Plug fuses are rated up to amperes, while cartridge fuses may be rated from 3 amperes to as Another means of protecting a breaker, most of which employ an electromagnet which breaks the circuit when its magnetic field is intensified to the maximum allowance. Having broken the circuit, the circuit breakers must be if the cause of the overload reset, the overload condition circuit breaker will again open the circuit immediately. sistance. Suppose that the insulation has worn off and a bare wire touches the exterior metal cabinet pliance. If the cabinet is properly grounded, the electricity will find an easy path to the ground through the ground is connected to a cold-water pipe. Any lesser conductor of electricity (such as a human body) may also touch the cabinet at the same time, will have no than the ground wire. If no other path to ground exists, however, then the electricity will flow through the body, with sometimes disastrous results. Those appliances which should be grounded, such as ranges, are always accompanied by complete grounding instructions and its. Do not defeat the purpose of these grounds by avoiding them—they are installed to protect against fatal shocks and demand ery careful installation. The first rule when working with electricity connect the appliance from the outlet and remove the fuse, or open the circuit breaker, at the control box. Even this wrong fuse might be removed. Therefore, test by turning the appliance "ON" to make doubly certain that the line is dead. Personal safety is a ital consideration both of yourself as you work on the appliance, and of the subsequent user. Connections should be secure so that they will not work terminal screw or the electrical cord to support weight or strain of any ind. If screws and other minor components are make sure they are of the right size. A longer screw or a bulkier component might penetrate wire, causing a short to the cabinet. If new branch lines must be installed, they should be home are usually run with thin-wall) with wires drawn through them, but may be either armored cable (BX) or a nonmetallic sheath cable (Romex), as shown in Fig. . Never replace a amp fuse with a amp. This circuit bearing a amp is most likely not intended to carry amperes. On the other hand, when replacing electrical components of house-wiring cables. itself, never replace with a component of lesser alue of capacity. The same part of the wire harness of an appliance must be replaced, Test equipment can be of considerable aid in diagnosing the cause of trouble in an appliance. Generally speaking, the purpose of testing is to discover whether or not cur- is flowing through a particular component without opposition or leaks. Thus, components may be found be ieaky" or open." The procedure component from the regular line, connect the leads from the test equipment to the component terminals, then plug in or switch on the test equipment to get a reading on the dial. Following are a list and description of some useful items to test equipment that you may need. This homemade testing instrument consists of a pair bell or buzzer connected tiyiidty tester. Since the bell will ring when the leads are touched to each other, it follows that when the leads are touched to opposite ends of a continuous circuit, the bell is unbroken, and will not sound if the circuit is broken. Fig. . Homemade continuity tester. By testing smaller and smaller segments of a broken circuit, the break can be located, whether ment of wire, or a particular component of a system. is also accomplished with the same instrument by touching one of its leads to the metal frame of an appliance, and then touching the other lead to one of the appliance terminals. If the bell or buzzer sounds, is a ground and the condition must be located and remedied before operation of the appliance is allowed. The test lamp uses household electricity, instead of dry cell batteries, as its source of power. You can make your own by purchasing an ordinary lamp socket, a wall plug, clips, and a length of wire from an trical supply store. Assemble the components as shown in When the test leads are brought into contact with each other, and the instrument is plugged into a wall outlet, the lamp will light. In order to check for a broken (open) circuit, follow this procedure: Attach the test leads to the terminals on the plug of the component or appliance you are testing. Be sure to remove your hands or any other part of your body from contact with the appliance. Plug the tester into the wall outlet briefly. (IMPORTANT: Never plug the tester into the outlet before attaching the test goes on, the circuit is unbroken (closed) to go on, a defective is indicated. Be sure is "on" in this test. A grounded circuit is indicated if the lamp lights when test leads are connected plugged into the power source. Try this test between each plug terminal and the metal frame. Professional Test Equipment technicians, not only to determine power breaks, but to analyze the appliance capacitors, excessive friction in mechanical trains, or ex- cessively low source oltage. The home repairman find such equipment beyond in understanding some of the failures that electrical ap- pliances are subject to. Ohmmeter—These serve chiefly tinuity in order to locate shorts or breaks in circuits, seg- ments of circuits, switches, thermostats, and start capac- itors on motors. An ohmmeter ordinarily measures sistance; when applied between points where continuity is supposed to exist and no meter indication should be repaired or replaced. If the needle moves, the is closed and can be considered functional does not apply to motor capacitors). Ammeter—A hook-on ammeter enient test instrument because used for measuring current flow, the reading being com- pared with a standard established by the appliance manu- high- or low- oltage conditions which may contribute to unsatisfactory performance. oltage at an outlet or, by disconnecting a motor and sub- livered by the appliance wiring harness to the motor can Wattmeter—A wattmeter helps the service technician efficiently the mechanical system is functioning. Too low readings can indicate weak or worn-out components in a circuit. Too high read- ings can indicate mechanical friction. Courtesy Weston Instruments of the foregoing instruments may be com- bined into one convenient piece of test equipment, called If you have more than normal aptitude or to tackle the more complicated repair obs or major will have to now more about the way a technician uses analyzing test instruments. The follow- ing discussion gives the highlights of the procedures fol- lowed by a technician when testing the arious compo- nents found in appliances. Plug the leads from the appliance and the oltmeter leads into the outlet regularly used for the appliance. Turn the appliance on as well as any others connected to the same branch line. Check with an ohmmeter for continuity across the ter- minals at each switch setting. CAUTION: Before making any tests with an ohmmeter, remove the power plug from the outlet to prevent damaging the instrument. Courtesy Airserco Mfg. Co. Use a wattmeter and a umper wire to check the over- protector on compressors should be connected between terminals (A and B on some compressors). higher than the specified wattage is consumed, the over- load protector is probably good if it opens the circuit, and some other component of the system should be suspected. If wattage consumption is normal and removal umper wire stops the compressor, the protector fective and should be replaced. across the terminals. Remove the thermostat to its high-limit setting, and connect the ohm- meter. No reading indicates a faulty thermostat—or pos- sibly only dirty contacts. If the motor draws excessive current or hums while starting (or does not start at all) , the start capacitor may be faulty. A isual check will frequently disclose a white residue at or near the terminals, indicating a faulty ca- pacitor. In the absence of any isual signs, the best test is to momentarily replace the old start capacitor with one of exactly the same specifications. A capacitor can also be checked by making a resistance it must first be discharged. To do so, pull the power plug from the outlet and momentarily short across the capacitor terminals with a umper wire. Set the ohmmeter on the megohm scale. Take a reading across the capacitor terminals. Reverse the leads and take less, the capacitor should be considered leaky and should be replaced. Unexplainable excessive power consumption indicates a faulty run capacitor. Make the ohmmeter test described If the needle comes almost stantly to zero and slowly returns to infinity, the capacitor is functioning properly. If the needle does not move at all, If the needle comes to rest some- where between zero and infinity, the capacitor In either of the latter cases, the capacitor unit should be Excessive wattage consumption of compressors frigerators, freezers, and air conditioners after reaching properly dropping out of the circuit after start. Low line oltage will sometimes cause the relay to check, short out the relay with a umper wire across the proper terminals. (Refer to the wiring diagram on manu- facturers' service literature for the correct terminals to ump.) Apply the umper wire while the compressor running, but for no longer than 2 or 3 seconds at a time. If the compressor runs properly during the test, a faulty Use the continuity test light to check suspected in the circuit. For example, if a fan motor does not run, disconnect its leads and connect them to the probes of the light. Always be sure that the appliance cycle usually accomplished by turning the timer dial to the proper setting. Check across the terminals with an ohmmeter same manner as for a thermostat check. Here again, dirty contacts can cause trouble. Check across each set of contact points with an ohm- meter, the same as for switches. Timers also get dirty fail to make contact. While it is not generally publicized, even in the owner's instruction manual, most appliances will require a mini- mum of preventive maintenance. This is particularly true faster and under greater load than other appliances. Any belt-driven appliance should be a candidate for preventive compressors and some washer of course, never require lubrication, the lubricant being sealed inside the mechanical housing. However, all pulley wheels, drive wheels, cam surfaces, and other exposed me- chanical parts should have regular attention, at least once surfaces which bear on (such as cam shafts) should be lightly coated with graph- ite or other suitable lubricant. Motor bearings need a drop or two of a good grade of motor oil three or four times a year. Water pumps are usually equipped with an oil wick for lubrication. This wick should be removed and soaked in turbine oil at least twice a year. Some appliances boast ''sealed" bearings on drive pul- leys. Take this with a grain of salt—and a drop of The best of these seals dry out after a year or two of use, permitting the lubricant to seep out. The sealed of these bearings should be pierced with an ice pick and lubricant applied regularly thereafter. The need for lubrication is betrayed by squeaks and binding in the mechanical system. The presence of oil in drip pans, on the floor, or in other places where around a sealed compressor almost always indicates a seri- ous failure has occurred, or is imminent, and should be traced to its source before further operation. Any special tools required to accomplish servicing an appliance will be covered in the chapter dealing with the particular appliance. A set of good electrical tools and a set of mechanic's tools to accomplish the ob. In addition, a wheel puller may be pliances as the primary source of power are Split-phase induction motor. Capacitor-start induction motor. 3. Permanent split-capacitor (PSC) An induction motor may be described as a motor hav- field, called the stator, through which electric current flows; and a stator, but not touching it at any point. No electrical con- nections are made to the rotor. A magnetic by current flowing through the stator coils the rotor, causing it to revolve at a constant speed. Motors used in appliances for secondary functions, such as in pumps and fans, may be of the shaded-pole type. is a low-output, low-speed motor with low starting power or torque. It has the advantage of de- sign simplicity, well suited to a simple Off function. A shaded-pole motor ranges in horsepower from Other desirable characteristics of motors for some ap- (1) two-speed operation and bility. Washers having ''gentle" and ''normal" speeds em- ploy two-speed motors. Single-phase electricity of the type commonly found in itself cause a motor to because the magnetic field set up by single-phase current is stationary, and once aligned with this locks in the static position. Once the rotor can be induced is fed by the pulsing cycles of the current. The problem, then, momentary boost to the motor so the rotor will begin to start winding and a run winding. The start winding composed of many turns of thin wire, setting up a high resistance. The run winding is composed of fewer turns of a heavy wire. The result is a ''phase difference." Fig. . Split-phase motor wiring This phase difference between the start and run wind- in the circuit momentarily, points around the circumference the rotor to turn, no matter in what position come to rest, in an effort to align itself with the unequal influence of a new magnetic causing still more movement. The rapidly changing direc- tion and strength of the rotating magnetic field cause the rotor to pick up speed and momentum. Once the rotor has achieved run speed, a mechanical or electrical relay opens the circuit to the start winding and the run winding alone is energized. The run winding sufficiently powerful Capacitor-Start, Induction-Run Motors In a capacitor-start, induction-run motor (Fig. ) the phase difference of two windings is still used at the start. However, the starting torque is increased by means of an electrolytic start capacitor. Capacitor-Start y Capacitor-Run Motors pacitor, called the run capacitor, in the circuit even after the motor has started. The run capacitor increases the power of the motor. . Capacitor-start capaci- Permanent Split-Capacitor (PSC) Motor The PSC motor (Fig. ) has no start capacitors and it has low starting torque tween a PSC motor and an ordinary is that the phase difference is permanent in the former; the run capacitor and auxiliary winding are never Because of its low starting torque, in applications where the it may be used to power compressors whose Fig. . Permanent split-capaci- tor PSC motor wiring diagram. as in air conditioners. This is the reason behind the delay requested of the operator of some immediately after a stop forces the motor to attempt to start under a full load, which it was never designed to induction-type motors through the use of two run windings, in addition to the start winding. An electrical switch sends current through only one of these windings for high speed, or connects both of them in parallel for low speed. By crossing the leads to an electric motor, polarity reversed and the rotor turns is accomplished by a switch, which There is not much that can happen to an electric motor itself; most motor failures are caused by defective auxil- iary components, such than by defects in the rotor or stator. Replacement of the defective component is normally a simple task, since most such components are mounted outside the motor housing. the entire stator and rotor must be either replaced or rewound. There are shops shops that also take on the more difficult task of rewind- ing stators. In normal practice, an exchange a one-for-one basis, plus the cost of rebuilding. In checking the performance of a motor, first make sure that the line oltage and frequency are the same as those listed on the motor or appliance nameplate. is of the type that can operate on either or olts, make sure the leads are connected properly as indicated at the appliance terminal box. crossed in reassembly, which causes the motor to change direction. Check by the sound of the motor whether or not the start winding is properly dropping out of the cir- cuit within 2 or 3 seconds after start. Check branch line fuses to be certain that the amperage perage rating of the motor. lubrication. By the same belts, gear trains, and other mechanisms by hand to un- cover any signs of mechanical binding. Check wiring connections to insure that wiring the wiring diagram sometimes provided on itself. Check for adequate grounding, par- ticularly with rubber-mounted motors. Look for a ground- ing wire sometimes hidden in one of the rubber feet on the base. Make a clean connection by scraping off any dirt connections. Check base and If a failure has occurred and the motor disconnect the wiring harness from the motor and across the terminals, using your series test lamp. Be sure that the motor overload the test lamp glows, the trouble is not in the motor. If an open test results, check each component, such as relays, capacitors, etc., in turn, making the tests described earlier in this chapter. Remember, when replacing start capaci- tors, to replace the relay as well. A refrigeration system can be summed up is a mechanical system of tubes of arying in- side diameter through which under alternating high and low pressure. (Fig. ), the refrigerant its heat and condense to a liquid. The greater part of the high side outside the cabinet. In the "low side" of the system side the refrigerator cabinet), the liquid refrigerant ex- pands to a apor, thus absorbing heat. Repeated circula- tion of the refrigerant will gradually cool down the frigerated space to the desired temperature. Now, each of the components of a refrigeration system (Start at the compressor Fig. and read the diagram counterclockwise.) refrigerant apor from the suction line in the low side, compresses it through the discharge line into the condenser. The con- is located outside the refrigerated space, usually at the back of the cabinet. When the refrigerated apor The condenser on most refrigerators and freezers is so designed and located that a natural draft of room air generated around and through the the condenser tubing. Fig. . Refrigerator schematic diagram. The heat contained in the apor (obeying the law that of higher temperature substances of lower temperature) passes into the fins of the condenser, from which it passes to the cooler air flow- ing past the fins. When the refrigerant apor reaches the (a pass is a turn of the copper tubing) From the condenser, the liquid refrigerant passes into it enters the restrictor, a length of copper tubing to separate the high side of the system from the low side. Having an inside diameter of only a few hundredths of an inch, the restrictor allows In the evaporator, which has tubing diameter, the liquid refrigerant it must ''borrow" energy from its surroundings to motivate the molecules to travel the greater distances involved. The energy it needs is present in the form of heat in the air immediately surrounding evaporator absorbs the heat surrounding it Fig. . Three stages of the refrigerant in the cooling tubes. The temperature of the has not been raised by even in the aporization process where refrigerant boils away. However, toward the end of travel in the evaporator, where complete aporization has the refrigerant apor now begins it no longer needs the energy. called superheated apor, or superheat. The hot refriger- ant apor now passes into the suction line, and once again into the compressor, where the cycle starts over again. refrigeration system. This the compressor. Since liquids are largely incompressible, liquid in the compressor would cause loud nocking noises and possible damage to the delicate leaf alves inside. is located near the top of the cabinet all refrigerators and freezers. As the air sur- rounding the evaporator sink to the bottom of the cabinet (cold air sinks, warm air rises). This stirs up the air at the bottom, displacing it so that it rises to the top (Fig. ) is always taking place within the the refrigerator cabinet. Since heat flows from substances of higher temperature to substances of lower temperature, any object at room is placed within the refrigerator will soon give up its own heat to the cooler air in the cabinet. its heat to the energy-starved cycling of the refrigerant through the evaporator gradu- ally cools the interior of the refrigerator or freezer (and to the desired temperature. The heart of a refrigeration system pressor. Most, if not all, refrigeration systems are of the is to say that the compressor pump electric motor that powers is simply a pump designed apor through a system electric motor mounted within the same shell, which is sealed to prevent the en- trance of dirt, outside located somewhere near the top of the compressor hous- ing. In most compressors, the hot apor In order to prevent damage to the compressor due to an overload or some other condition which would put a heavy drain on the current supplied to the motor, an overload reaches the motor windings. if the refrigerant were allowed cycle without interruption, it would eventually bring the temperature of the interior down to its own temperature, which might be as low as minus F. at pound per square inch. This would be far too cold for proper storage of refrigerated foods. The principal means of controlling the temperature of is by cycling the motor compressor on and off. As long as the motor compressor the refrigerant is permitted to remain at a uniform pres- sure throughout the system, and no refrigeration takes (Fig. ), accomplishes the compressor tube with a bulb at one end and an expanding and con- tracting bellows at the other. This assembly is filled with a small amount of the refrigerant used to temperature changes occurring at the source pressor running, the evaporator becomes colder, and the contracts, reducing the pressure at the bellows end. A spring overcomes the ex- pansion of the bellows, and it begins to collapse. At a pre- spring mechanism causes an electric switch to snap open, interrupting the flow of current to the compressor With the compressor stopped, a gradual warmup curs in the evaporator as heat from the room penetrates the cabinet. This causes the refrigerant apor in the sens- ing bulb to expand, pushing the bellows against the force of the spring. At the upper end of the range of tempera- anism of the electric switch forces the contacts to snap to the compressor, causing close with a positive If the contacts were permitted to approach each other panied by a hot spark. This condition, called arcing, would enough. The snap provided by the spring mechanism mini- mizes this condition. ments—the range and differential. The range of a thermo- set by the manufacturer and should only be ad- accomplished by means Range determines the cut-in and cut-out temperatures at which the compressor will cycle on and changes in the adjustment may cause the refrigerator to cycle on and off through a range of temperatures wholly inadequate for proper food storage. The differential adjustment is intended for use by the is accomplished by turning a numbered The numbers usually have no relationship to any actual temperature, but are merely used for reference. The dif- ferential setting will raise or lower the cut-out tempera- it does not affect the cut-in temperature, which is usually fixed at from F to F. This ensures that interior temperatures below the point necessary for proper food storage, and The effect of a low-temperature setting of the ential nob is to cause the compressor to run for a longer period of time before cut-out, and for shorter periods at the higher temperature settings. When warm air passes over a contact with the object gives up its moisture in the form of water. The more humid the greater the contrast of temperature between the air and the object, the more rapid A refrigerator evaporator, the ice trays, cooling plate, and other components nearby are When the refrigerator door is opened, a mass of warm is admitted into the interior of the cabinet. This air passing over the cold components releases its moisture in the form of water. The water then component, eventually building up a thick coating of frost. The more often the refrigerator door Frost hampers the free exchange of heat between the air in the cabinet interior, evaporator that it must be removed periodically ; the removal process is called defrosting. In many models, defrosting is accomplished semiauto- position, which shuts off the current to the compressor. Warm water placed in a pan under the evaporator may be used to melt the frost, or the user may let defrosting proceed with no further attention. When the evaporator has reached a predetermined high and off the surfaces, the circuit to the compressor automatically by means of a temperature-sensing thermo- stat, and the refrigerator resumes normal operation of its Fully automatic defrosting, which is called by a ariety of names, is intended more to prevent frost from forming than to remove it once it has formed. The initiation of the is accomplished in one of two ways. In the first method, a cam on the bottom of the refrigerator door counter mechanism. When opened and closed a predetermined number of times, the In the second method, an automatic timer each time the compressor operates. The timer functions only during the period of compressor operation. After about hours of accumulated running mechanism operates and the defrost cycle circuit is closed. A less frequently used method of initiating the defrost A spring-loaded button is gradually pushed toward a con- tact by the increasing thickness of ice has reached a predetermined thickness, the button trips a spring mechanism, which in turn causes the defrost-cycle circuit to method depends on the thickness of the truth be called a ' frost" or frost-free" system. plished in several ways. In the first of two of the more popular ways, a heating coil is employed directly beneath the evaporator. As the defrost cycle is initiated, the com- is opened and the heat-coil circuit closed. off intense heat for a short period, quickly melts the ice without affecting the interior tem- perature of the cabinet too drastically. As the ice melts, the resultant water drips into a drain pan, through drain channels in the wall of the refrigera- into a condensate pan beneath process being sometimes hastened by either a condenser reaches a predetermined high (approximately F.), a defrost terminating thermostat closes the circuit to the compressor and opens the circuit to the heater refrigerator now resumes normal operation. of defrosting, and one that seems to be in more widespread use, causes the refrigerant to bypass the condenser temporarily so that the evaporator, instead of cooling the space, now functions exactly the same as the condenser (Fig. ) . Here's how it works solenoid alve. This alve ant flow a choice of two channels. In the closed position (normal refrigeration), the refrigerant travels through the condenser and into the alve through Inlet A, emerg- refrigerant has been acted on by the condenser, so that it is in a cooled state when (defrost cycle operating), the re- frigerant may enter the alve at both Inlet A and Inlet B. is the channel for the refrigerant that has by- . Refrigerator schematic. least resistance. The flow to the condenser, however, not entirely restricted, because dangerous pressures would into the alve at Inlet A, indicating that the condenser still open, along with the bypass flow. The net effect of the alve is to admit hot refrigerant apor to the evaporator for a short period of time. Since apor normally leaves the compressor at approximately F., the thin film of ice which may have formed on the evaporator since the last defrost cycle quickly melts away. As in the heater-coil defrost cycle, a defrost terminating thermostat breaks the circuit to the solenoid alve when a predetermined high has been reached, and the erant apor proceeds on its normal course through condenser and restrictor tubing. Many popular models contain two separate compart- ments, each heavily insulated from the other. Each com- partment operates at a different temperature, the refrig- erator section being maintained perature which may range from F. to F., while the temperature in the freezer section is normally ept at ap- proximately F. This temperature difference is achieved in several ways in existing refrigerator freezers. it may appear that a refrigerator freezer com- bination has two separate evaporators, one unit, with some of its passes in the freezer section and the two compartments was achieved through the use of a solenoid alve and a bypass refrigerant-flow circuit . Two-compartment cooling. of temperature-difference control. refrigerator compartment temperature reached a predetermined low, the solenoid alve ^as en- ergized by an electrical circuit closed through a sensing erted the flow of refrigerant, bypassing the refrigerator frigerant traveled only through the freezer section passes. (DPC) alve is employed (Fig. ). The DPC alve located in the evaporator passes between the refrigerator Fig. . Differential pressure-control alve method of two-compart- and the freezer compartments. Just ahead of the refrig- restrictor tubing causes a moderate pressure drop in the refrigerator section of the evaporator, permitting only a portion of the refrigerant to boil, but maintaining most of the refrigerant in a liquid it reaches the DPC alve. At this point, ust ahead of the freezer evaporator, the pressure drop comes much greater, causing the refrigerant boiling point to drop to an equivalent temperature of minus F. (obey- ing the positive relationship between the pressure of a apor and its temperature). Control of the DPC alve amount of flow obstruction, increasing or decreasing the drop in pressure to achieve a ariety of temperatures. A third method of achieving a difference in tempera- ture between the freezer and refrigerator sections arying the evaporator surface area in the two compart- (Fig. ). In this method, a balance by the engineer in the design of the system, taking into account the olume of the spaces to be refrigerated. A plate is mounted on the wall of the refrigerator compart- ment; this plate usually consists of two pieces of metal pressed together in such a way that channels are left open travel. The size of the plate in relation to the cubic olume though the temperature at any one point on the surface of the plate reaches F., the average temperature of the refrigerated space remains at a constant F. to F., and the freezer stays at F. Miscellaneous Components Dryer—Water will affect the efficiency of a refrigera- it will not aporize at the pressures and temperatures associated with refrigerants, but will liquid or even a frozen liquids are incompressible, any water in the system will overload the motor compressor and may even damage the alves and other controls, as was mentioned previously. . Evaporator-area method of cooling two compartments. Only or parts of water per million parts of refnger- ant can be tolerated in a refrigeration system. Dryers are introduced into the refrigerant line between the condenser and the capillary to extract any water or other impurities that may be present. The dryer contains gel, calcium sulphate, or other dehydrating agents with an affinity for water. As the re- frigerant flows through the dryer, the water and other impurities it may contain are trapped and held. Heat Exchanger—Usually not a component as such in refrigerator, the heat exchanger the meeting of the suction and discharge in intimate contact for part (relatively) warm refrigerant liquid passing through the capillary on its way to the evaporator gives up some of its heat to the cooler refrigerant apor in the line. This does two things— (1) pressure of the apor in the suction line, thereby improv- ing the efficiency of the compressor; and extra insurance that the liquid refrigerant will not apor- ize prematurely before Accumulator—This component serves as a essel any unevaporated liquid emerging from the evaporator. is particularly useful in split evaporators where only part of the evaporator is in use, as in a convertible re- The outlet from the accumulator, also called a header, is located above the surface of any liquid passing only apor into the suction Freezers, of course, work on exactly the same principle as refrigerators, with the exception that the temperatures employed are about F. lower than those in a typical refrigerator. Some freezers provide two settings. Sharp Freeze, and Frozen Food Storage. The Sharp Freeze posi- tion of the operating dial simply cycles the compressor to run continuously until the customer returns the dial to Frozen Food Storage, the normal setting. Temperatures inside the cabinet during Sharp Freeze will fall to minus °F. or below, depending on how long the compressor is permitted to operate. Normal operation of a freezer main- tains an inside temperature of approximately F., and is accomplished by the cycling on and pressor, as regulated by a thermostat. Evaporator—The evaporator in a freezer usually takes bedded in the space between the liner and the outer shell (Fig. ). This arrangement insures the even distribu- tion of zero cold throughout the roomy cabinet interior. Most household refrigerators run on - olt, cycle, single-phase ac, such as commonly supplied to homes . Freezer evaporator. single-temperature, single-door refrigerator Fig. . Note how the compressor circuit may be com- pletely disconnected from the main refrigerator by a service-cord plug. Current flows through the door-light switch to the in- thermostat. The second wire of the power cord feeds cur- rent directly to the same contact on the thermostat. When is permitted to flow to the motor compressor through the motor-compressor service Current now flows to the overload protector and, under drain or high- oltage condition occur, the contacts would be broken and the circuit opened. When the overload con- dition subsides, the protector returns to tion, and the current is again permitted to flow. There are two ways to check the performance of a re- frigerator or freezer (or any other major appliance run by electricity). The first is a mechanical check, the second is an electrical test ; both methods can be used in diagnos- ing the source of trouble in a refrigeration system. (such as inks, nicks, or breaks in . Simple refrigerator wiring diagram. in drain pans, signs of compressor burnout, the presence of in or near the compressor, and other abnormal conditions. One of the most common the condenser tubing and fins. You can also learn something from the feel of discharge mean an obstruction in the line, which is also betrayed by sweating ahead of any possible obstruction. Temperature Check—The interior of the cabinet may be checked for proper temperature by using a thermom- eter with a range above F. Select a container of liquid or a mass of food such as a loaf of bread which has been stored in the refrigerator for at least hours prior to the check. Immerse, or bury, the tip of the thermometer it reaches the center of the close the refrigerator door. Wait a few minutes for the thermometer to stabilize, then read the temperature while still immersed. Do not make the temperature check with food that has been stored in or near the evapo- rator, but instead select that which is near the center of the refrigerated space. Running-Time Check—There are so many ariables in- olved in the length of time that a compressor is hardly worth the effort to make a running- time check. Room temperature, humidity, how a warm mass of food was put away, and the differential setting of the thermostat time. In addition, some of the automatic defrost or frost- sit idly by waiting for the compressor to cycle off. In most cases, manufacturers have discontinued giving running time averages in service literature. Exces- sive running time, therefore, is not of itself a sign of sys- Leak Test—Modern refrigerants are colorless and odor- sight or smell. One of the surest signs of a refrigerant leak is the presence of oil at any point in the system. Oil mixes intimately with refrigerant liquid and apor and is present throughout the interior of the tubing and com- ponents. Any refrigerant leak is therefore sure to be ac- Unit Analysis—If any of the following conditions are the only ones encountered in servicing the refrigerator or freezer, the compressor need not be replaced High-side leak resulting in partial or complete loss of refrigerant charge. b. Low-side leaks in the components located outside the c. Too much refrigerant charge (a rare condition, un- less the system has been opened since manufacture) d. Too little refrigerant charge (only a technician with proper equipment can determine this for you). e. The presence of moisture in the system as a result of low-side leaks in the components located outside the refrigerated space. f. Moisture in the line due to high-side leaks. under any of the following conditions a. Broken tubing (provided the unit has been operating with the broken tubing. If the unit has never been b. Any leak detected in the low side of the system in any component located within the refrigerated space. Particles of burned-out motor windings detected in any part of the system. minals, housing welds, or tubing oints at or near runs without pumping. whether or not a particular component is open, or shorted, repair or replacement. gives other information of alue in diagnosing the cause Line Voltage—Line oltage should be read with the re- frigerator running under normal load at the time of the test. Other appliances in the home which would normally operate at the same time should also be turned on. Switch Ter^minals—Place a test lamp across the arious contacts in the switch. If the lamp fails to light, a defec- Test—Excessive consumption compressor on reaching run speed could indicate a relay start. Low line oltage will sometimes cause the relay to ''chatter." To check this, short out the relay with a umper umper). Apply the short during compressor run for no more than 2 or 3 seconds at a time. If the compressor runs properly during the test, a faulty relay Capacitor Test—The easiest test for a defective capaci- it with one nown to be good. Be sure it with a capacitor of exactly the same micro- Wiring Test—Check for broken wires by isual inspec- tion as far as possible, or by placing a test cord between arious components in turn until the break is isolated. Solenoid Test {Tivo-Temperature Models and Convert- ibles)—With this unit operating in normal refrigeration cycle, place a test lamp across the terminals of the initia- tor mechanism (counter cam, defrost-cycle timer, or hand (provided the wiring harness To eep failures to a minimum, remember the follow- 1. The number and lengths of time a refrigerator or freezer door is opened will greatly add to the accum- ulation of frost on the evaporator. A on the door-handle side and adjusted to the refrig- erator will cut down on frost accumulation by reduc- ing the number of trips the sink, etc., leaving the door open between trips. 2. Those models without automatic defrosting should regularly—about twice in hot as in cold weather. Frost should never be per- mitted to build up to a thick coating on the evapora- tor, because this reduces heat transfer and impairs the efficiency of the unit. Frost also traps and holds (if of the exposed type) Dirt on the condenser The following ''symptoms" are the signs of trouble in the system. Each symptom is followed by a number of it will serve as a guide to the more com- mon failures and causes of failure Unit Will Not Operate, No Interior Light 1. Power cord removed from or loose in wall outlet. should be no more than ^ normal. Check for an excessive number of appliances working off the same branch line. Replace fuse. Unit Will Not Operate, Interior Light On Defective thermostat. Test as outlined previously. Defective relay. Test as outlined previously. protector. Test as outlined pre- Defective capacitor. Replace. 6. Open or shorted compressor. Test as outlined pre- 7. Broken lead wires. Visual inspection or test as out- Initiator mechanism defective. Test by isual inspec- tion or with test lamp across wiring terminals. Man- ually rotate cam to test for free movement. 2. Open or shorted solenoid alve coil. With the solenoid control in the position which normally supplies cur- rent to the alve, test across wiring terminals. Unit Runs Continuously, Cabinet Warm 1. Extreme hot weather conditions may contribute to 2. Poor door seal at gasket. Interior light may stay on when door is closed. Check Unit Runs Continuously, Cabinet Cold Defective thermostat. Defrost Water Not Evaporating is employed, check across terminals with test lamp. 2. Condenser fan defective. Check fan motor with test 1. Check for misaligned fan blades, loose tubing con- (particularly around motor compressor), defective fan motor bearings, If noise seems to come from within the compressor and does not stop after the unit has been tion for a short time, internal trouble such as broken internal mountings, loose shaft bear- rings. Compressor should be given compression test or replaced. is a loud click at start, the motor overload protector not a bad sign in itself, but is an indication that an overload condition is being encountered. dition persists, make a unit analysis. 4. High head pressure may cause noisy operation of the compressor. Check for extremely clogged condition Modern washers can be divided roughly into two main tumbler and agitator), and the conventional type divided into wringer and twin-tub washers). that the clothes are placed in the washer through a door that opens to the front. A few tumbler washers have bor- rowed a page out of the commercial laundry book and basket through which the clothes are loaded or removed. The cylindrical basket of a tumbler washer rotates in a horizontal plane—that (Fig. ). In some models the axis lifting them out of the soapy water by means of the rotat- ing basket, and letting them fall back into the water by their own weight as they reach the top of the revolution. during the wash and rinse periods, at the end of which basket then revolves much faster action," rpm for "gentle action") damp dry and ready for final drying. is no agitator in a tumbler washer, con- truction tends to be somewhat simpler, requiring only a means to spin the cylinder basket at two Agitator washers are loaded from the top. In this type (Fig. ), and the basket does not spin during the wash cycle. Instead, an agitator tub, sloshing the water and the clothes through an arc of about °. Some agitators have a ertical motion as well, still others incline the plane of movement from the ertical, causing an undulating motion. These additional motions are designed to create greater turbulence in the water for maximum loosening of dirt. An automatic washing machine complicated piece of machinery in the modern home block diagram. Fig. ). is complicated because required to perform a great many functions in the course of the complete washing cycle. more than close circuits to the drive and timer motors. The drive motor in most machines of an automatic washer. agitator or, in tumbler washers, the cylinder basket, and a water pump. A secondary circuit in the electrical system feeds current to a timer motor which controls all the operations of the machine during the entire wash and When the user turns the arious selector dials for the aligned, presetting a switch and adjusting a pair of water- inlet alves. If the machine offers a choice of either nor- wheels are revolved slowly by the timer motor. As they travel, opening and closing solenoids, and segments of circuits activate or stop the arious components in the system. dium, or low—depending on the amount of wash to be done. When the user makes a switch or a float switch is preset to open when the proper level is reached. In the same manner, selecting hot, warm, or cold wash water involves opening or closing the water inlet alves by means of solenoids. fill switch in most machines is in control through- agitator cannot function until the machine Initially, then, when the user user selects a hot wash cycle, a solenoid open the hot water inlet, bypassing the cold water solenoid alve, or ice ersa, for a cold wash. If a warm wash had been selected, both solenoids would have been energized. The water is cut off by the pressure or float switch when the proper level is reached. In the meantime, the timer motor has been slowly re- rotating the cam wheels closes that completes the circuit to the transmission. The fill switch is still in control, however, and will not permit current to flow to energize the transmission until fill switch has been satisfied, current to the transmission now flows and another solenoid is energized. This solenoid, through mechanical means which examined later, causes the drive clutch to engage and the agitator begins to oscillate, or the tumbler basket begins to revolve, in the wash cycle. washers are driven through either a gear train or a clutch arrangement. In the case of an agitator, means of either (1) a train consisting of a pinion gear, a drive gear, a connecting rod, and a sector gear, or rack and pinion arrangement. These mechanical assem- blies serve to convert the rotary motion of the drive motor to an oscillating motion, driving the agitator through an arc of about ° at strokes per minute. In some agi- tator washers, the cylinder basket may wobble during agitation, but it does not spin. However, during the spin cycle, the agitator is locked in with the cylinder basket so that both are turning. If the agitator did not turn during spin, the clothes would be torn between the spinning basket and the stationary agitator. After the agitation or wash cycle, a cam surface on the timer-motor cam assembly closes another switch, energiz- ing a solenoid alve to open and drain the tub. In most washers, the water pump is constantly in operation dur- necessary to open and close arious alves in the water all motion of the agitator or cylinder basket stops under the control of the fill switch, which will not permit resumption of drive until A short spin cycle may follow, designed to remove any suds that may remain in the tub and the clothes. A spray briefly into the tub, outlet alve remains open is admitted drains out immediately. The timer motor now advances another cam surface to close the switch controlling the water-inlet alve, at the same time opening the circuit to the drive solenoid, caus- ing the cylinder basket to come to a stop. After a brief pause, the timer motor closes the fill switch and the tub fills with water again. In some washers, this ture may be preselected affords arious combinations of hot, warm or cold wash, and warm or cold rinses. The deep-rinsing cycle is usually brief, accompanied by a short period of agitation. At its conclusion, of the cylinder basket or agitator again comes to a stop The washer now goes into the final rinse and spin-dry cycles. Final rinsing may consist of a spin, accompanied by one or two brief spray rinses, the purpose of which is to dislodge, through the holes in the cylinder basket, any residue of soap scum or dirt which may have been deposited on the surface of the clothes as the water level receded during the drain cycle. After the last spray rinse, the cylinder basket continues to spin at high speed for a few minutes, during which most of the water out of the clothes by the centrifugal force of the spin. Finally, the timer motor advances to a point where all circuits are opened and the washer shuts itself Conventional washers are (Fig. ). The user fills the tub by means of a hose of a conventional washer. connected to a nearby mixing faucet, soap and bleach are added, and the washer motor is turned on. The user starts agitation by throwing a clutch lever which engages a gear train similar to that used in an automatic washer. The user decides the clothes have been washed long enough. The agitator clutch lever is then disengaged and the hand- operated drain alve turned to Drain. It is important to understand the need for the agitator to continue operating without water in the tub, it would be many times more difficult to push against the weight of the clothes, prob- ably causing a motor overload. addition, the clothes themselves might become mangled in the process. through the drain hose into a drain laundry room), or by means of a water pump. The pump operates continuously as long as the motor the user accomplishing draining by opening a alve is then refilled with clear water for a deep rinse, also accompanied by agitation. In a wringer washer the mangle is turned on by means of a lever. This engages a ertical shaft which transfers power from the drive motor to the mangle gear train and rollers. The rollers of the mangle are made of soft rubber or composition and are adjustable by means of a pressure- In twin-tub conventional washers places the damp clothes in a spin basket, which is caused to rotate at high speed by engaging another clutch lever. Most twin-tub washers, however, have a basket of rela- tively small diameter, necessitating a much higher rate of larger diameter basket washer. Some of the older models of twin-tub washers have no safety switch to stop the spin basket when the access door is opened. All later models do have some such spinning basket to a stop as quickly as possible. In this group of components are found the main-drive motor, the gear-train assembly which powers the agitator in agitator washers, and the basket-drive and brake as- As mentioned previously, gear trains in agitator wash- ers may be of either the sector gear, connector rod, or the rack and pinion gear type. In the rack and pinion type is driven by the main belt, taking power from the motor. A stud mounted on the drive gear provides a bearing surface for a connecting other end with a row of gear teeth, called a rack. As the back and forth at about complete strokes per minute. The rack end of the connecting rod meshes with the teeth on the pinion gear which is fixed to the agitator shaft, thus imparting an oscillating motion to the agitator. The latter travels approximately °, first in one direction, then the other, also at approximately complete move- In a ariation of this method, a sector gear is employed in place of the rack gear. A pinion gear drives ^^^5''^^'^^PINION GEAR a larger main-drive gear as in the previous example. A on both ends, to the main-drive gear and a sector gear, sector gear meshes with the agitator gear to accomplish In both methods the drive is operating continu- ously as long as the motor is turned on, which means that the agitator would oscillate continuously were not introduced to disengage the gear train appropriate points in the washing cycle. This plished by converting the electrical impulse of a solenoid plunger into mechanical action. It is important to understand that the amount of force exerted by a solenoid plunger would never, of system powered by a Va or ^ hp motor. Some other means of actually extracting a gear from the train must be used. is initiated but not actually accom- . Agitator gear mounted on the The location chosen for the breaking of the gear train is the meeting of the rack or sector gear with the agitator shaft. This provides the greatest amount of cushioning for the sudden shock of the meshing of the gear teeth. The agitator gear may be moved to one of two positions on the agitator shaft locks with the shaft by means of a pin. A spring exerts pressure downward, eeping the gear from locking with the agitator shaft. In its lower position, the agitator gear oscillates freely, entirely independent of the agitator. A solenoid assembly is mounted on the shaft of the sec- or connecting rod rack so that the Fig. . Solenoid assembly rides on the sector-gear shaft. entire solenoid assembly rocks back and forth with is mounted between the solenoid assembly and the agitator gear. The plunger of the solenoid normally weight. The lower end plunger is slotted so that the plunger straddles the cam bar, and a horizontal pin is fitted to the ends of the fork formed by the slot in the plunger, passing through a two- plunger rides in the lower level of the slot, carried there Fig. . Solenoid plunger detail (not actuated). is so located that the action of the solenoid assembly riding on the sector gear will maintain the cam bar in the with- drawn, or back, position of its lateral travel. As soon as the solenoid is energized, however, is pulled up into the upper level of the cam-bar is so located that the rocking action (powered by the drive motor, not by the solenoid will push the cam bar forward. A cam surface at the agitator gear end of the cam bar causes the agitator gear fork to travel upward, taking the agitator gear with latter now engages with the pin drive shaft, and the agitator begins to oscillate. When the solenoid circuit is opened, the plunger will fall of its own weight, dropping to the lower level of the slot on the cam bar and thus withdrawing the front end of the cam bar from the agitator fork. This permits the spring on the agitator shaft to force the agitator gear downward to disengage Basket-Drive and Brake Assembly In both agitator- and tumbler-type washers, the inder basket is driven by a belt riding on a drive pulley. In agitator washers the same belt drives both the basket and pinion gear pulleys. it is necessary to reduce the speed of the cylinder basket from approximately rpm the spin cycle to the or rpm required in the wash is accomplished by a transmission or speed- is actuated by a solenoid plunger in much the same manner as described in the section on the A cylinder basket loaded with wet clothes and spinning develops many hundreds ertial force. This force not only is dangerous, but tends to eep the cylinder basket spinning for a ery long time after the driving force is removed. Some sort of braking is therefore required, for reasons of both safety . Basket-drive and brake assembly. A typical basket drive and brake assembly for an agita- tor washer is pictured in Fig. . For this type washer the agitator shaft passes through a drive tube, on which is force-fitted. When the drive tube rotates, the cylinder basket rotates with other except during spin, when they are locked together The basket-drive pulley is always turning whenever the it revolves freely on the drive tube. Directly above the basket-drive pulley is permanently attached with a special clutch lining mounted on the top of the the stationary brake yoke. A tension spring tends to pull the brake yoke downward, exerting pressure against the clutch disc, tending to cause it to engage the clutch lining on the basket drive pulley. This engagement is prevented, however, by a basket clutch shaft riding on the top edge of an extractor cam bar, which is normally thrust forward into a slot in the clutch shaft. Above the brake yoke is mounted a brake-drum assem- is normally pressed against brake linings on both the bottom of the tub and the top of the brake yoke. is mounted on the pivot stud of the sector gear, exactly the same as in the previous gear train discussion. As long as the solenoid is not energized, the plunger pin rides in the lower level of the extractor it to remain thrust forward into and holding up the basket clutch shaft. is energized, the plunger upward by the magnetic force of the coil, and the pin now rides back and forth in the upper slot of the extractor cam bar. In so doing, it pulls the extractor cam bar back- ward out of the slot in the basket clutch shaft, allowing the latter to slide downward on the inclined cam surface of the bar toward the clutch lining. The tension spring now forces the brake yoke down- ward, pressing the basket-drive clutch clutch lining on the top of the basket-drive pulley. After initial slippage, the clutch lining firmly engages the basket-drive tube) and the cylinder basket begins to ro- tate. The basket gradually builds up speed until there no longer any slippage, and the full speed and power of the motor are transmitted to the basket for the duration tractor cam bar. This pushes the front end of the bar into the basket clutch shaft and forces the brake yoke upward against the force of the tension spring to disengage the clutch from the clutch lining. As the brake yoke is forced it closes the distance between the brake drums and the brake linings, bringing the heavily loaded basket to a quick, smooth stop. The mangle, or wringer (Fig. ), of a conventional is an assembly designed to wring out moisture from the wet clothes when they are passed between two rubber or composition rollers under controlled pressure. a wringer-type washer Power for the wringer through a wringer-drive shaft (Fig. ) turning a sys- tem of gears at the lower in most machines. A lever engages the gear train to oper- rollers, and generally forward, reverse, and stop. Fig. . Wringer power take-off. The water system in an automatic washer consists of a series of alves, a water pump, and arious accessory components such as dispensers, Water enters the tub through an inlet alve, which may or may not provide an automatic temperature control for mixing hot and cold water. Usually, water enters the ma- chine under its own pressure. As the water level rises, fill switch, closing the circuit to the agitator control solenoid, and the machine begins the wash cycle. In some machines, the water pump also serves to circulate the water, taking it from the bottom of the tub it out through an inlet above the water level near the top of the tub. This recirculation serves to en- sure that soaps and bleach are thoroughly mixed with the wash water. Energizing a solenoid on the water pump permits the passage of the recirculated water driven by the recirculating impeller. Fig. . Automatic-washer water system. Water is ejected from the tub by the discharge impeller of the water pump. Discharge is effected by flapper alves in the body of the pump, which are actuated by the same mechanism that motivates the gear extraction in the drive. inlet alves of an automatic washer are operated by solenoid coils and plungers to permit or obstruct the passage of water. There are three basic types. Single Solenoid Shutoff Valve (Fig. In this type, solenoid performs only the function mixing of incoming hot and cold water for desired wash and rinse temperature being performed at the faucets by Double Solenoid Shutoff Valve of alve permits three water temperature selections—hot, cold. Energizing of the cold-water permits the passage of cold water only; energizing the hot-water solenoid allows only hot water to enter. When both solenoids are energized, both hot and cold water are admitted to the tub, resulting in a warm wash. Triple Solenoid Shutoff Valve permits four different wash temperatures—hot, medium, It has a mixing chamber in which cold and hot water in arying amounts are combined to obtain the desired wash temperatures. The actual temperature of the wash water depends on the temperature of the water in the hot-water tank and the temperature of the cold tap water. In a double-solenoid Fig. . Triple-solenoid shutoflF alve. equivalent to half the difference between tank water tem- perature and cold tap water temperature. For example, if Two-Way Valves (Fig. Some washing machines employ a suds-return" system whereby the sudsy water in a subsequent wash. selects the suds-return energized on the two-way alve to divert the drain water into the laundry tub instead of into the regular drain tub. is a T" type, with a rubber diaphragm stretched over two ports. Energizing of the solenoid pulls Fig. . Two-way suds-return alve permits reuse of wash water. down one end of a pivoted operating lever ^hich presses a disc against the rubber diaphragm over the drain port, diaphragm over the suds-return port. Normally, this alve directs the water flow water is stored in this system—rinse water is drained in (Fig. ) operates continuously, re- ceiving its power directly from the main drive belt. Most single-direction pump, . Automatic washer water pump. direction for both discharge and circulating impeller and the discharge impeller are located at opposite ends of the impeller shaft which drives both. In the suds-return machine, the pump may also be used to return the sudsy water to the machine from the storage Many different inds of filters are employed in the dif- ferent makes of washing machines. However, their main lint and other foreign particles which are loosened from the clothing by the agitating ac- tion. These filters are sometimes placed line, and are removable for periodic cleaning. Other ma- filter in the recirculation system at the top of the tub. Still others may have filters located on the Many washers are equipped with a trap assembly (Fig. which may otherwise circulate and damage the machine. With the exception of the combination washer dryer, automatic and conventional washers employ a not only the drive motor and the timer motor, but also the arious electrical components used in controlling the flow of water in and out of the machine. The following discussion of each of the common trical components found greatly in diagnosing and correcting electrical failures. is the heart of the control for all functions of an automatic washer. It consists of a syn- which drives a pinion gear meshed with a drive gear in the timer assembly. This assembly may consist of a series of cam wheels or discs with inclined projections on their edges. As the cam wheels slowly revolve, cam surfaces rise to make contact with switch levers, which in turn open or close electrical circuits to solenoids in the mechanical system. The length of arc of each cam surface, as well as its position on the cam wheel with respect to other cams on the same and other wheels, is carefully planned so that the resulting action is accurately timed and synchronized. Fill switches are of two types—pressure-actuated and float-actuated. In a pressure-actuated switch a plastic tube of small diameter is connected to a stand- washer tub. As the water level rises, a bubble of air trapped in the plastic tub and compressed. A diaphragm in the switch body becomes distended as the air pressure Fig. . Pressure switch used to at a preselected pressure causes a pair of electrical contacts to separate, opening the circuit to the inlet alve solenoid and cutting off the float switch is ust what its name implies. A stand- pipe alongside the water tub fills with water to the same level as the water in the tub. A float rides up and down in operating arm connected to a switch and opens the solenoid. As the water recedes, the weight of the switch to close so that water may be admitted when the timer completes the circuit. Pressure switches are calibrated at the factory and the adjustment screw normally ment. A ery small movement of the screw would mate- rially change the water level in the tub, requiring ery painstaking accuracy. Defective pressure switches should be replaced, not repaired. to interrupting the current to the inlet- alve solenoids, are also in control of the other functions of the washer, since these other functions are dependent for their effectiveness on the proper water level (or absence of water) satisfied with respect to water level, it completes the cir- cuits to the timer motor (the timer does not advance while is filling initially) and to the solenoid in control fill switch completes a circuit to the solenoid in control of the basket drive dur- ing the spin cycle. This latter circuit the pressure switch senses zero pressure, indicating that During the deep-rinse fill cycle, a bypass circuit passes fill switch. This means that even if the cams in the timer advance to the point where agitation would normally begin, the fill switch would not permit the circuit to be closed. On the other hand, should fill be accomplished before the cams advance to the proper point, no agitation would take place until the timer cuits were completed. This delay until a stated time period is necessary to compensate for the difference faucet water pressures, which results in longer or shorter A switch connected between the spin solenoid and the timer is attached to the clothes-loading door or lid of most washers so that spinning stops when the door This is a safety measure added to prevent accidents. Solenoids are a means of converting electrical energy into mechanical energy to trip switches, open and close alves, and actuate mechanical sist of a coil of wire around which a magnetic field is de- eloped when current passes through powerful magnetic force is able to move a metal core or plunger resting inside the coil. Various arrangements of plunger, core, and coil exist, but the resulting action is al- ways the same. The movement of the plunger is resisted either by a spring or by gravity, so that when the energiz- Defective solenoids are usually replaced rather than re- paired—especially water- alve solenoids, which are sealed at the factory to prevent the entry of water into their electrical components. The most popular type of motor used on washing ma- hp, - olt, cycle, capacitor-start is equipped with thermal overload protectors will disconnect the motor from the occurs. These protectors selves when the motor has cooled sufficiently, and opera- tion can resume. However, if the condition which inally caused the overload is not corrected, the overload protector will soon open the motor circuit again. In washers equipped with a selection of two speeds, the motor; these terminals permit selections such as Normal Action or Gentle Action to bring one or the other run winding into operation to achieve different speeds. Electrical Connections Modern homes will have a convenient, grounded trical outlet near the wash tubs. Some of these outlets are three-pronged plug of the washer, the third prong being connected to the ground. Be sure the receptacle is actually grounded by testing as follows: tester in one hole of the outlet and touch the other to the it should read the full power-line oltage. If the outlet is not grounded it will be necessary to run the ground wire provided by the manufacturer used, the three-pronged plug may be used with a two- prong outlet by employing a special adapter. Local elec- trical codes will determine the advisability of using these Electric combination washer dryers will require a - olt power source in addition to the - olt source. These for convenience in making connections. Gas combination washer dryers will require plumbing connections to the gas supply pipe. It is a good idea when making this connection to provide an individual shutoff alve to the machine so that it may be isolated from the rest of the gas system whenever servicing Joints must be carefully sealed to prevent the escape of even the smallest amount of gas. While a small gas leak may not constitute a serious threat to safety, the source of a persistent odor. Test for leaks with soap bubbles. Never test for inflammable gas leaks with an All combination units will require some means of ent- (except those provided with a con- . For enting suggestions, see the discus- Checking the performance of a washer to pinpoint the cause of failures requires checking a particular compo- nent at the time in the wash or rinse cycle at which supposed to operate. For example, if the inlet- alve sole- noid is suspected of failure, the washer timer dial should be turned to the initial fill position, so that the electrical circuit to the solenoid is completed. Only then is ble to test for continuity in the circuit. Similarly, agitator cam solenoid is suspected, the timer dial should be advanced to the wash cycle to complete the circuit to the agitator solenoid. Common Failures and Replacements Among the more common ment in automatic washers are Worn or Broken Drive Belt—A loose belt is betrayed by a flapping noise throughout the cycling of the washer, and particularly when the machine is agitating or spinning. A broken belt, of course, results in no agitation, spin, or pumping, although initial fill will take place as usual. Re- than ust slipping the new one over the motor pulley and the arious drive pulleys, and adjusting tension. Tension mount bolt. Simply loosen the mounting line between the pulleys, but not so tight that they can- Defective Timer Assembly or Motor—Timer assemblies are susceptible to wear because of their relatively fragile construction. Faulty timers may be detected by functioning of the washer. Most timer trouble occurs at the switches, where burnouts, corrosion, and film deposits easier and cheaper to replace a timer assembly than to timer requires synchronizing and indexing. Replacement will be evidenced by incorrect water standpipe is protected with a screen, are likely to become stuck by the introduction of small objects. Control Solenoids—In most cases, these in the electrical components, rather than their mechanical elements. Check for continuity by plac- Faulty solenoids are detected by noting the absence of a particular function when it should occur, such as agita- Drive Motor—The first check of a drive motor is to see is receiving the proper oltage. This connecting the leads to the motor and connecting them to timer dial is turned to ON, the motor should be replaced. However, replacing the motor will certainly not eradicate the basic cause for the failure. Remember, motor burn- outs don't ust happen—they are caused. Here are some 1. Extremely low- oltage conditions. 2. Loose electrical connections. 3. Binding in the motor bearings or the washer mech- anism, or foreign particles in the motor switch. Overload, evidenced by a high wattage reading. The following are some of the reasons for additional 2. Lack of lubrication at bearing surfaces or 3. Drive belt bottoming in pulleys. Belts are intended to seat in pulleys so their outer edges are higher than the edge of the pulley. Bottoming means that too much belt surface is coming in contact with the pulley, resulting in a drag. When belt replace. Too tight an adjustment of the drive belt can also cause the same condition. Too slow spinning may, of course, be due to binding in the mechanical train. However, it must be borne in mind that slow spinning can also be caused by belt slippage, is in turn caused by oil or grease on the belt. The basket-drive clutch plate may also become fouled with oil, requiring cleaning or replacement. The following is a list of some of the more common fail- ures, along with possible causes and their solutions. 1. Water faucets closed tion is made on a dial, and either the switch or the is closed. Check continuity in the switch and solenoid and replace if either shows an open. 3. Open timer circuit. Replace timer assembly. 4. Open wiring harness circuit. Check between trical components for continuity. Repair or replace 5. Clogged inlet alve screen. Remove and clean screen. Be careful not to bend or distort the screen surface when performing this operation. Check for electrical continuity and mechanical opera- tion. Repair or replace as necessary. Miscellaneous causes such as loose leads on electrical components, inked hoses, trouble in the house water etc. Make isual check to spot and correct Branch-line fuse blown or circuit breaker tripped. reset. Fuse may blow as a temporary overload when two or more appliances is carrying too many amperes. 2. Overload protector tripped due load. Wait for thermal where for overload condition. 3. No power to washer. Plug oltmeter into machine, and line cord into oltmeter, to check for line olt- age. Replace line cord 5. Loose or disconnected leads to timer terminal block, etc. Tighten or make connections. Check all wiring. Defective fill switch. Check and replace, if necessary. Machine Will Not Agitate Defective timer assembly. Check tinuity. If no continuity exists between the common terminal and one or more of the other terminals in the assembly, timer must be replaced. separate motor which checks good, this part need not Faulty transmission. Make wattage test. If all other electrical tests are positive and wattage consumption is excessive, a mechanical fault in the drive mech- is indicated. Transmissions of most washers may be repaired in the shop, first cleaning all parts to permit a careful isual check. It to replace all the parts in the gear case—individual parts may be ordered by number by consulting man- ufacturers' literature. Check transmission parts for shafts, and broken or worn seals or gaskets. mechanical freedom of movement of plunger, burrs etc. Replace electrically de- fective solenoids, repair or replace mechanical parts Inoperative motor, loose pulleys, defective fill switch, loose or disconnected leads, broken wiring, inopera- tive motor centrifugal switch. Take necessary action 1. Clogged drain pump or drain connections, loose or broken pump-impeller shaft, faulty flapper alves in pump. Low wattage with pump operating and water tub filled will indicate a broken impeller shaft. High wattage will indicate an obstruction in the pump or connections. Repair or replace as indicated. 2. Kinked drain hose, air lock, or suds may be caused by baffle missing on tub at drain port. Suds lock is caused by excessive suds. Add cold water to tub and scoop out suds. 1. Loose or broken belt. Inspect and replace or adjust. Grease or oil on clutch plate or on drive belt will re- sult in slow spin, or no spin. lowered. If no continuity, replace switch. place if necessary. Check mechanical train triggered by solenoid for burrs, bent cams, Faulty water-level switch, broken wires, switch which will stop the washer washer may walk" with an unbalanced rect the walking by adjusting and caused by sympathetic ibrations being set up weakened floor. Correct the floor condition. 2. Damaged or misadjusted suspension system. Check to make sure that all suspension rods, motor mounts, rubber blocks, etc., are equally tight. Also check any 1. Broken agitator, or burrs on clothes basket. Inspect and replace, if necessary. clothes. Check operating Water or Machine Will Not Shut Off flowing. If fill switch opens at proper level and water continues above prescribed water alve is indicated. Also check wiring harness, timer, inlet and drain hoses for tight connections; check pump gasket, gear-case gaskets and seals, tub gaskets and hose bodies for breaks. Clothes dryers accomplish drying by furnishing heated air in large olume into the interior of a rotating drum where the clothes are tumbled to expose all their surfaces air in large olume, and means of expelling moisture-laden air from the interior of the cabinet. In addition, dryers require controls for safe- guarding clothes against extremes of heat and overdrying. is a block diagram which illustrates the oper- ating pattern, as well as the general location, of the main components of a dryer. The relatively dry air from the surrounding room enters the dryer cabinet through ari- ous ents in the front and back. A blower system forces this air through a flue arrangement where it is heated and then into the revolving drum through holes in the front The bulk of the air circulates freely in the interior of the drum, passing through the tumbling clothes. The air in the interior of the drum soon approaches saturation, absorbing moisture from the clothes. The blower, which operates continuously while the drum is in motion, forces the moisture-laden air out through a ent leading outside the cabinet. Most dryers require further enting to the The principle of operation of a dryer strikes a balance between two contributing factors. The first is that heated air can absorb more moisture than cool air. Air at °F. is capable of absorbing only about 2 grains of moisture foot. Air at °F. can absorb about 8 grains of moisture, while air heated to F. absorbs grains of moisture per cubic foot. The second factor concerns the movement of air. Even if heated to F., motionless air immediately adjacent will ery quickly become . Diagram of a modern clothes to absorb any more moisture. placed by currents of fresh, dry air, however, the mois- ture-absorbing process is hastened considerably. By employing air that is both heated and moving (aver- F., and moving at about it is possible to hasten the natural drying process to a point where an efficient unit can remove approximately gal.) from a load of clothes in If the clothes are wrung out thoroughly before being placed in the dryer, a modern unit can dry a load (including the weight of the water) The controls and heater assembly dryer are far more complex than the comparable com- ponents in electric models because of the requirement of a pilot flame and the on and off cycling of the gas flow to Following is a list of the main components of a typical gas dryer, with a description of their functioning. Power-Cord Plugs—These prong type, the third prong being a cabinet ground. Most appliances are provided with an alternate ground wire and harness for attaching to the nearest suitable ground. Local electrical codes will spell out whether or not adapt- ers for wall outlets may be used along with the alternate Motors—Dryer motors are rpm. Gas dryers, unlike electric, require only regular - olt house current for operation. A shaft protruding from both ends of the motor provides a power take-off for the revolving drum on one end and the blower on the other. Main-Burner Gas Solenoids—These may be actuated by down by a transformer. The gas solenoid wired in series with the control thermostats and the cen- ance against dangerous build-up the main-burner alve only after the motor has attained clock mechanism or by an electric motor (Fig. 4A) 4B shows the arrangement and method of operation of a typical cam used in these timer mechanisms. Automatic Controls—These controls for heavy and light etc., are normally of the potentiometer type, per- mitting selection of arious degrees of resistance ahead of the auxiliary control thermostat. By reducing or increas- Fig. . A thermocouple. ing amperage, the wattage consumption of the bias heater of the auxiliary control thermostat is carefully controlled, causing the auxiliary control thermostat to open later or sooner as a means of controlling the length of the heat-on Thermocouples—When the pilot burner is lighted, a hot and cold unction of the two metals iron and nickel creates a current, measured in millivolts of electric- ity, in a coil around the solenoid alve plunger. The cur- rent is sufficient to hold open the plunger, though not suffi- ciently strong initially to overcome the force of a spring. Thus, it is necessary to press a button to hold the plunger open against the force of the spring couple oint warms up sufficiently (about seconds), after which the small thermocouple-generated current sufficient to hold up the solenoid. Any momentary interruption of this small current will cause the solenoid plunger to close the alve, shutting off the supply of gas to both the pilot and the main burner. This alve will not reopen by itself—the start button must be pressed again and a flame applied to the pilot burner. "Spark Plugs" or Glow Coils—A - olt transformer supplies current to a - olt transformer which ergizes a glow coil located at the pilot burner. The current coil of platinum wire heat, sufficient to ignite the gas coming out of the strip, which instantly snaps tion, interrupting the The extremely low oltage is necessary because a higher potential would quickly burn out the fine platinum wire. Pressure Regulators—These devices are for regulating the escape pressure of the gas entering the dryer and are pressure. Adjustments may be made, when necessary, by means of an adjusting screw. This should be done by a qualified technician, who would follow the instructions in precise measurement of the gas pressure. Burner Orifices—Different types of gas (natural, manu- shipped to areas using a particular type of gas normally have the proper orifice already installed. The wrong ori- fice will greatly affect the Btu heat input of the burner. Main-Burner Solenoid Valve—These alves control the flow of gas to the main burner and are wired controlled by the auxiliary limit thermostats. If the contacts of either thermostat are in the open position, the flow of current to the normally of both thermostats are in their normally closed position, a flow of current creates a magnetic field around the sole- noid plunger, causing it to react against the force of a spring to open the gas alve. The pilot-burner solenoid alve is located ahead of terms of gas flow) the main-burner solenoid so that if the pilot flame should go out and the thermocouple current to the pilot solenoid alve is interrupted, both the main and pilot-burner gas supply will be shut limit thermostat is to interrupt the current to the heater should the temperature of the heater housing exceed a In some models, the high-limit thermostat also shuts off power to the drive motor so that the dryer High-limit thermostats are usually preset at the fac- tory, with no further adjustment possible. In gas models, the high limit is set at approximately F. Cycling Thermostats—In automatic models, normally closed cycling thermostats are used in conjunction with auxiliary control thermostats having preset at lower cut-on and ment of temperature range in the home is possible. When in the closed position, cycling thermostats pass the open position, the current is diverted to the flow path in which the auxiliary control thermostat is located, open- ing the circuit to the main heater. Auxiliary Control Thermostats—These are of two types —the standard bimetal, normally the bimetal, normally closed, disc type with built-in bias The function of the auxiliary control thermostat open the circuit to the heater when its high limit (usually ° or ° higher than the cycling thermostat) When its low limit is reached, it closes the circuit to the heater, ''passing the ball" again to the cycling thermostat In some auxiliary control thermostats, the high causes it to snap into a position that opens a relay circuit heater, but provides a second path motor for a short ''cool-down" period. When the low limit is reached after the cool-down period, the contacts snap back into the already open relay circuit and the machine is completely shut off. Cylinder-Drive Assemblies—To reduce the at which the clothes drum must revolve, a speed is required. One such system the motor pulley drives a driven pulley, which in turn drives the drum. In a ariation of (Fig. ), the motor pulley the drum through a ackshaft. The outside circumference of the drum's drive wheel is rubber, causing the drum to revolve by means of friction. In earlier models, a belt itch is employed as a safety heat should any of the belts break. The normally open closed by a spring-loaded plunger is ept in the closed position by the tension of the Fig. . Belt-break switch. belt. If the tension should be relieved, as in the case of a plunger to open the switch. This switch series with the main burner solenoid, thus shutting is now afforded by the high-limit thermostat used in later models, which senses heat build- off the main burner as well as the drive which shuts off both heat and drive motor when the door is opened. In some models, the service door tected in the same manner. (Fig. ) are available, for either a particu- lar model, or universal types to fit all models. In enting it is important that the dryer be located near an outside wall through which the ent pipe may be is recommended that not more than four right-angle turns be made in the exhaust pipe, which may ary from 3 to 4 inches in diameter, depending on the dryer model. If four right angles are made in the exhaust pipe, not more than ft. of straight pipe should be used to reach the outdoors. For two right angles, a maximum ft. of straight pipe may be used. Some models of automatic dryers wash the duced by the dryer down the water drain. They accom- plish this by passing the exhaust air through a condenser counters the cold surfaces of the condenser, the moisture it contains condenses to liquid, carrying with particles of lint that have escaped the lint filter. The con- densate and the lint particles are washed down the drain by the same water that is used to cool the condenser. differ from gas models mainly place of the open gas flame. However, there are a few The schematic diagram in Fig. traces the circuitry of a typical electric dryer employing a timed drying cycle. Electric dryer schematic showing manual timer. Note that the dryer requires a three-wire - olt power source for most efficient operation. - olt heating element on standard rent by shifting one wire to the neutral line, as noted in , running only two wires to the power source. This, of course, cuts down the eflficiency of the dryer by about half, which means that clothes will take twice as It is not recommended practice. A - olt dryer also requires a standard - olt cir- cuit to drive the motor and the controls. This is obtained by using two of the three wires as shown in Fig. Some electric dryers also make use of a - olt current, obtained by means of a transformer, to power the thermo- stat controls. A - olt current makes less hefty components, thus cutting the arious places around the drum, the most widely used location being around edge. The element consists of a coil of wire through which Fig. . Method of converting a flows the - olt current. Most such heaters are rated to watts at olts. The heater the high-limit thermostat better to replace the entire heater assembly. Fig. shows a typical hook-up of an electric dryer. Note the use of No. wire in the hook-up located more than feet from the main fuse box, use . Electric dryers should be connected to a sepa- rate branch circuit with no other appliances on the same line. Fusing should be a minimum of amperes. Fig. . Connection of a - olt dryer to the power source. Checking the performance of a dryer, apart from the obvious isual checks, is largely a matter of taking pulse and temperature. Wattage readings, like pulse read- properly. Temperatures duct taken at the appropriate time in the drying cycle will give additional information which can be used to double- check the wattage findings. dence of his senses in diagnosing trouble. He touches the air ducts to feel how hot they are; he looks for signs of telltale sounds that indicate some abnormal condition All dryers employ essentially the same basic principle for their operation, as outlined at the beginning of this chapter. But different makes and models may differ ery widely from each other in the details of horsepower, watt- age, cut-out and cut-in temperatures, and air elocity, as well as types of timers, heaters, thermostats, regulators, alves, and other components. It would be quite beyond the scope of this book to attempt to define all the perform- However, the standards of performance of each dryer are usually published by the manufacturer in his service literature. This literature will list the actual rating figures for wattages, oltages, resistances, and temperatures. The following describes how these alues are applied to the performance of the dryer being checked. Tempej^ature and Operating Check—If the dryer instructions as to uncrating, removing shipping blocks, checking for loose wires, is run empty, add about F. to the alues given in the manufacturer's ratings with full load. in the exhaust air flow well inside the exhaust duct. Read temperatures during the heat-on cycle as well as during cool-down. When reading temperatures, use the highest reading during heat-on, the lowest reading during Readings of exhaust temperatures will be affected by the temperature of the room in which the dryer is located. Most performance standards take this into account, giv- ing standard readings at different ambient temperatures. heater in electric dryers, as well as bias heaters in gas and electric auxiliary control thermostats. Wattage read- ings of the latter with a ariance of ^ or more from the published standard indicate that replacement In addition, wattage readings may be taken of the drive load. Abnormally high wattage binding condition exists in the cylinder drive system or the blower system, and a serious obstruction exists in the air flow ducts. Amperage Readings—To discover shorts fast, simple check may be made by using a Voltage Check—Particularly important that rated oltages be supplied A - olt dryer will not operate as efficiently if the oltage supplied measures only olts. Power supply oltages are read at the entrance to the dryer. If an exceptionally long lead is required from the power source to the dryer larger size wire than that recommended by the manufac- turer should be used. Some manufacturers supply transformer up or step down oltage from olts. These its are generally accompanied by detailed installation instructions and a wiring diagram. Common Failures and Replacements Failures in dryers occur most often in the moving parts of the cylinder drive system. One of the most frequently belt wear may be caused by binding at the pulley bearing, little belt tension. To correct or pre- ent binding conditions at the pulley be sure to lubricate it properly. See Chapter 1 for tips on lubrication. Belt tension may be checked isually. The belt should be tight enough to form a straight line where from one pulley to the next. It should not be so tight that you cannot flex it slightly at the midpoint between pulleys with a slight squeeze. Be careful not to get oil in the pulley grooves or on the belt itself when lubricating. Oil deterior- Another common failure in dryers However, motor burnouts caused. When replacing the motor of any appliance, look failure. Among the more common causes for a motor burnout are a defective overload pro- tector, loose or shorted wiring in the appliance, as well itself, binding in the moving parts, and fusing or house wiring defects. Be sure the branch- amperage as given on the dryer nameplate. less frequent cause of trouble may be found will interfere with the free flow of air through the dryer. A dislocation of an air duct may cause the escape of lint to the moving parts of the dryer. Venting systems have also been nown to ''blow back." Strong or gusty winds from the outdoors may enter the dryer through the exhaust ent outlet and actually blow out the pilot flame. The exhaust ent should be provided with a hinged aluminum door that will only permit the outward flow of air. Be sure the door moves freely under light pressure so the exhaust air flow will not be restricted. Timer motors tend to fail after long use. Contacts may circuitry may become shorted leaky. Replacement of the In gas dryers the most frequent cause for failure the gas system is the pilot-burner solenoid alve. Before any repairs or disassembly dryer, the power cord should be pulled from the wall out- let—especially important the high oltages developed and because dryers are fre- quently located on basement floors in direct contact with the ground. When checking components, such as heaters with the dryer partially disassembled, turn on the timer motor to the appropriate point in its cycle and then plug in the power cord without touching the cabinet or other components. Testing for shorts of individual components or wiring harness with an ohmmeter or test lamp may be accomplished in most cases without turning the dryer on. Following are some of the more common signs of trou- gas, and the probable causes and remedies. It is by no means a complete list, but should serve as a guide breaker, breaks in house wiring or power cord, or de- fective power-cord plug. other appliance on the same branch line, etc. Merely Defective motor, door switch, or timer motor. Apply Press door switch button manually with dryer turned on to check for mechanical defect. Replace or repair 3. Loose connections at components or terminal block. Check segments of wire circuitry with test lamp. is normally closed, will permit current flow at temperatures below danger mostat leads with ohmmeter or test lamp. If contacts thermostat is defective and should be replaced. Motor Runs But Drum Does Not Turn shaft. Make necessary repairs or replacements. In electric dryers, look for defective circuitry at or near the heating element and within the heating ele- itself. Test for shorts with test lamp. In gas dryers, look for a defective pilot-burner sole- noid alve or a defective main-burner solenoid. These placed as an assembly. Also check gas supply lines 3. Check for a defective open or shorted cycling thermo- stat or auxiliary control thermostat. Manufacturer's literature will give the proper ranges of these ther- testing bias heaters in auxiliary control thermostats. a thermostat may become disturbed without causing the thermostat contacts to test open or short. If this is suspected, the thermostat should In earlier models, a worn or loose belt may cause the protective belt switch to function, shutting flow of current to the electric heater or to the main gas burner solenoid alve. Dryer Will Not Shut Off Inoperative or defective clock timer or timer motor. A bent stop pin on the timer dial may prevent the all the way to Stop. Burned out contacts in the timer may also cause this symptom. also for shorting of the timer cuitry as well as the drive motor. into the dryer that are not thoroughly wrung out, will of course increase drying time. 2. Air flow restriction. Check ducts, lint traps, outdoor exhaust outlet. Check also for improper blower func- belt, worn out moving parts on blower, etc. 3. Cutout temperature may be too low. Make tempera- ture check as given above. If cutout temperature lower than minus tolerance given in manufacturer's literature, the cycling thermostat should be replaced, unless the range adjusting screw (in electric dryers). Check oltage at power source and at the dryer terminals. If oltage line with next larger size wire. power source, consult local utility. Gas Pilot Flame Will Not Stay Lit 1. Check positioning of thermocouple oint in relation to pilot flame. One-half inch of tip of thermocouple should be buried in the flame, with the flame break- ing around it. Adjust height of flame by turning pilot flame adjusting screw until flame burns blue with- 2. Check circuitry from thermocouple to solenoid Gas Pilot Flame Will Not Light 1. Check gas supply and house gas alve If glow coil is employed, check - olt circuit for breaks. Check isually for breaks in glow Gas Main Burner Will Not Light 1. Check main-burner solenoid alve and circuitry with test lamp for breaks or shorts in magnetic coil. 2. Check main-burner air shutter for clogging. Adjust- ing screw releases shutter so that it may be turned to until a clean-burning blue flame with a minimum of noise is achieved. SKILLFACT Books offer the yourself and hobbyist reader an oppor- anyone can understand by experts fields, these books clearly subjects, show you how to save money by doing-it- care and REPAIR of your How to install your own Build useful ELECTRONIC care and REPAIR of your fascinating, easy- uikl now about ELECTRONICS Getting the most from your now about GARAGE DOOR care and REPAIR of your Dictionary of ELECTRONIC now about MODEL RADIO EDITORS and ENGINEERS, ltd.